Distr.: General 17 December 2014 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-eighth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the UniversalPeriodic Review* Plurinational State of Bolivia * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.14-24579 *1424579* 
Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction .............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................. 5–112 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review............................................................ 5–22 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................ 23–112 6 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations ..................................................................... 113–117 13 Annex Composition of the delegation .......................................................................................................... 26 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its twentieth session from 27 October to 7 November 2014. The review of the Plurinational State of Bolivia was held at the 4th meeting on 28 October 2014. The delegation of the Plurinational State of Bolivia was headed by Héctor Enrique Arce Zaconeta, State Attorney General. At its 10th meeting, held on 31 October 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on the Plurinational State of Bolivia. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of the Plurinational State of Bolivia: Benin, Costa Rica, and Pakistan. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of the Plurinational State of Bolivia: (a) A national report submitted in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/BOL/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/BOL/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/BOL/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, the Czech Republic, Germany, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, Mexico, Norway, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to the Plurinational State of Bolivia through the troika. The questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR). Additional questions raised during the dialogue by Canada, Finland, France, Montenegro and Portugal are summarized in section I.B below. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. In his introductory remarks, the State Attorney General, Mr. Arce Zaconeta, referred to five main issues, (a) the Political Constitution of the Plurinational State of Bolivia; (b) economic, social and cultural rights; (c) political rights and democracy; (d) the development of new codification, together with judicial and social legislation; and (e) perspectives on human rights. 6. Since its first review in 2010, the Plurinational State of Bolivia had made progress in the implementation of commitments for the fulfilment of human rights, in line with the Constitution. The new Constitution was the result of a social and political struggle based on the principles of the promotion, protection and enjoyment of human rights. The Constitution, drafted through a democratic process, established international human rights treaties as taking precedence in the national legal order. 7. The adoption of the new Constitution marked an important change in the country, as a basis for restructuring the Plurinational State, with the cultural diversity that characterized the population determining the basis for social justice. The Constitution recognized the rights of nations and indigenous peoples, native and peasant, to exercise their own justice system. Legislation was important to achieve buen vivir (“Good Living”) for the peoples, but it could not disregard their needs. During the period 2010–2014, the Plurinational State of Bolivia had adopted a broad spectrum of laws for the effective realization of rights, including laws for the protection of the right to education, health, housing, the rights of peoples in vulnerable situations, older persons and persons with disabilities, as well as the rights of nations and indigenous peoples, native and peasant, and Afro-Bolivians. 8. As a result of the implementation of the economic, social, community and productive model, the Plurinational State of Bolivia had reduced extreme poverty from 38 per cent in 2005 to 18 per cent in 2013. The Plurinational State of Bolivia had taken a strategic approach to the administration of economic resources and redistributed earnings through conditional social bonuses. Progressive and sustainable salary increases had also been implemented, consolidating the basis for a truly social State. 9. In the area of health, the national budget had increased significantly. Important programmes aimed at consolidating the comprehensive, intersectoral and intercultural approach to health, based on the universality and quality of health services, were highlighted. 10. The right to education had been recognized in the Constitution. The Plurinational State of Bolivia provided free education at all levels, including at higher level. It promoted assistance to primary and secondary education for all children through the provision of an economic incentive. The use of technology in education was also being promoted. Community Distance Learning Centres had been set up in rural areas and access to internet services and mobile communication had been made possible. Free laptop computers had been provided to all teachers and computers were being distributed to all secondary level students. 11. In the area of labour rights, important laws, programmes and policies had been adopted. The unemployment rate had been lowered from 8 per cent in 2006 to 3.2 per cent in 2012. 12. The delegation also provided information on legislation and policies regarding access to land, the promotion of agricultural production and the prioritization of organic production in harmony with “Mother Earth”. The capacities of nations and indigenous peoples, native and peasant, and Afro-Bolivian communities had been strengthened, with an emphasis on intercultural knowledge and practices. Universal agricultural insurance, known as Pachamama, had been created, with a view to securing agricultural production affected by climate change. 13. Information regarding strategic action to ensure access to housing, drinking water and sanitation, and electricity was also provided. The Plurinational State of Bolivia indicated that it had reached the Millennium Development Goal on the reduction of extreme poverty and hunger and the third target of the seventh goal, of halving the proportion of the population without sustainable access to safe drinking water. 14. The Constitution had broadened the democratic participation of the population. Bolivians living abroad in around 30 countries could now exercise their right to vote. Free access to birth registration had also been extended. 15. Freedom of expression was guaranteed, and important legislation for the protection of journalists had been adopted during recent years. In 2010, a law to fight corruption had been adopted, which had led to 82 convictions and the recovery of more than 100 million United States dollars for the State. The Plurinational State of Bolivia had also adopted legislation to combat racism and all forms of discrimination. 16. Information on significant efforts to codify legislation was also provided. The Code of Constitutional Procedure, the Civil Procedure Code and the Children and Adolescent Code, inter alia, had been adopted and others, such as the Family and Family Procedure Code and the Penal System Code were currently being drafted. Penal reform was an important ongoing task in the Plurinational State of Bolivia, to guarantee effectively the right to life and security of the person. 17. The Plurinational State of Bolivia was working to address challenges to achieve “Good Living”, to establish a truly social and democratic rule of law State. It was a nation that believed in itself and looks to its future with faith and hope. The Plurinational State of Bolivia was today a nation that respected itself and was respected in the international arena. In order to achieve its goals, it had adopted the Patriotic Agenda 2025, based on 13 pillars, establishing a dignified, sovereign and productive State. The main objective of the agenda was to implement the human rights enshrined in the Constitution. 18. The Minister of Justice provided information regarding the rights of women in the Plurinational State of Bolivia. In addition to 26 specific articles on women’s rights in the new Constitution, a gender perspective and inclusive and non-sexist language had also been included. The progressive legal framework and the adoption of public policies had allowed the Plurinational State of Bolivia to make progress. The recognition of gender equality, non-violence and the full enjoyment of human rights for women were concepts that were now to be incorporated in all State and social structures. 19. Feminicide was also now criminalized. The Plurinational State of Bolivia had adopted legislation to guarantee women a life free of violence, with clear institutional responsibilities that allowed for timely intervention. The political activities of women were now also protected by the Law against harassment and political violence towards women now adopted, which prohibited all forms of discrimination against women in society. 20. The Comprehensive Act on guaranteeing a life free of violence for women established judicial procedures to punish those responsible for feminicide, and new offences of violence against women, including physical violence, violence in the media, sexual violence, violence in the provision of health services, economic violence, violence in the education system, violence in the exercise of political rights and leadership, and institutional violence. The law and regulations approved allowed for the progressive creation of shelters for women victims of violence, their children and other dependants. The regulations also established responsibilities for the creation and management of the comprehensive information system for gender-based violence prevention, assistance, punishment and eradication (SIPPASE), in the Ministry of Justice. 21. Information was also provided on progress made with regard to the rights of children and adolescents. Children’s and adolescents’ activities within the family framework and social community played a socialization and training role and were not a threat to children’s rights. Activities were performed within a family framework in their communities, were culturally highly valued and accepted and had the aim of developing their skills for life and the strengthening of their communal life within the “Good Living” framework. The Children and Adolescents Code had been adopted in 2014. 22. With regard to progress made on the rights of nations and indigenous peoples, native and peasant, incorporated in the Constitution, the Plurinational State of Bolivia highlighted the importance of adopting a draft bill on prior, free and informed consultation. The Plurinational State of Bolivia emphasized its willingness and interest in establishing consultation processes to enable communities to introduce their own vision of development. Reference was also made to the importance of a law for the protection of nations and indigenous peoples and natives in highly vulnerable situations, adopted in 2013. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 23. During the interactive dialogue, 76 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue can be found in section II of the present report. All written statements of the delegations, to be checked against delivery on the United Nations Webcast archives,1 are posted on the extranet of the Human Rights Council when they become available.2 24. Ecuador recognized efforts to comply with the recommendations received in 2009 with regard to compliance with the First Millennium Development Goal and stated that it showed the importance the Plurinational State of Bolivia attached to the redistribution of wealth. 25. Cuba recognized efforts to implement recommendations from the first review, in particular the development of indicators on the rights to education, work, health, adequate food, housing and the right of women to a life free from violence. 26. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela underscored that the Plurinational State of Bolivia had recovered control of the country’s economy and was working towards a just distribution of wealth and free education. It congratulated the State party on progress made in reaching the Millennium Development Goal of eradicating extreme poverty and hunger. 27. Finland expressed concern that abortion was criminalized in the Plurinational State of Bolivia and enquired about measures to implement the Acts related to the rights of women and the Strategic National Plan on Sexual and Reproductive Health 2009–2015. 28. France asked the delegation about the development of the justice system for indigenous peoples and its future within the reforms being undertaken, and about additional measures envisaged to address violence against women. 29. Germany welcomed progress made since the previous review of the Plurinational State of Bolivia, especially in combating poverty and introducing legislation to protect minority rights. It encouraged the State party to further those efforts. 30. Equatorial Guinea welcomed the establishment of a human rights education plan and the implementation of public policies in line with the 2025 Patriotic Agenda, stating that those initiatives would allow a broader integration of all communities in the territory. 31. Guatemala welcomed the ratification of international instruments, the adoption of laws and the creation of mechanisms to strengthen human rights, and the reduction of extreme poverty. 32. Hungary stated that, according to available data, more than 80 per cent of the prison population in the Plurinational State of Bolivia was awaiting sentence and was being held in pretrial detention. It expressed concern at the seemingly frequent political interference in judicial proceedings. Reference was made to the case of a Hungarian national. 33. India commended action to implement UPR recommendations and the commitment to establishing an inter-institutional forum on human rights issues for the preparation of periodic reports. 1 See http://webtv.un.org/meetings-events/human-rights-council/universal-periodic-review/20th.upr/watch/bolivia-20th-session-of-universal-periodic-review/3864334821001. 2 See https://extranet.ohchr.org/sites/upr/Sessions/20session/Bolivia/Pages/default.aspx. 34. Indonesia welcomed the launch of the Plan on Human Rights Education, the decision to launch a National Day against Racism and All Forms of Discrimination and the formulation of an action plan to eliminate racism and discriminatory practices. 35. The Islamic Republic of Iran noted positively legislative measures undertaken, the adoption of the Plan on Human Rights Education, the National Equal Opportunities Plan for women and the National Programme for Combating Gender-based Violence. 36. Ireland expressed concerns about high levels of impunity for human rights violations and urged the Plurinational State of Bolivia to strengthen rule of law, ensuring that no person or institution was above the law and that impunity for human rights violations was not tolerated. 37. Israel expressed concern that the Plurinational State of Bolivia still owed reports to treaty bodies, some overdue for more than four years. 38. Italy welcomed efforts to improve the functioning of the judicial system and encouraged the authorities to further engage on the reform of the justice sector and tackle issues concerning delay of justice and overuse of protective custody. 39. Kuwait valued the efforts of the Plurinational State of Bolivia towards the enhancement of the legal and institutional framework with a view to protecting and promoting human rights, and highlighted its cooperation with the mechanisms of the Human Rights Council. 40. Lebanon underscored steps such as the standing invitation extended to the special procedures of the Human Rights Council and the legal measures and mechanisms aimed at combating and punishing racism. 41. Malaysia noted positively achievements on poverty eradication, labour and employment policies, children’s rights, education, and the right to safe drinking water and sanitation, in line with recommendations made by Malaysia during the first UPR. 42. Mauritania welcomed all legislative and political initiatives by the Plurinational State of Bolivia, such as the adoption of the Plan of Action 2012–2015 aimed at combating racism and all forms of discrimination. It recommended the adoption of the report on the State party. 43. Mexico recognized efforts on economic, social and cultural rights, and noted positively the collaboration with human rights mechanisms that had visited the country, as well as the renewal of the collaboration agreement with the regional office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. 44. Montenegro enquired about the main challenges that needed to be addressed to reduce the number of overdue reports and about the activities to implement fully the 2012– 2015 Policy against Racism and All Forms of Discrimination. 45. Morocco congratulated the Plurinational State of Bolivia for its cooperation with the human rights mechanisms, including the special procedures, as well as efforts to promote the economic and social rights of vulnerable persons through the fight against extreme poverty. 46. Netherlands commended the Plurinational State of Bolivia for supporting the recommendations to uphold and improve the rights of women and girls. It expressed concern about the minimum age at which children would be allowed to work under law 548, as it seemed in contradiction with International Labour Organization Convention No. 138 (1973) concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment. 47. Nicaragua highlighted the fact that the economic, social, community and productive model implemented by the Government of President Morales had made it possible for Bolivian society to live in conditions of equality and social justice. 48. Norway congratulated the Plurinational State of Bolivia on ratifying the Protocol to the American Convention for Human Rights but expressed concern about new legislation allowing children as young as 10 to work legally, and about long delays in trials and legal proceedings. 49. Pakistan commended the Plurinational State of Bolivia on meeting the Millennium Development Goal for extreme poverty. Pakistan also noted that Bolivia had improved access to education, health, basic services, food and housing through a wide range of policy measures. 50. Paraguay commended the National Equal Opportunities Plan and welcomed the voluntary commitment to creating an inter-institutional human rights space. It also stated that the Government’s decision to develop indicators for education, work, health and other subjects would allow important advances. 51. Peru highlighted a number of advances made, such as the incorporation of norms on the right to education, bilingual intercultural education and the invitation to all special procedures of the Human Rights Council to visit the Plurinational State of Bolivia. 52. The Philippines noted policies and programmes to combat racism and all forms of discrimination, and to promote the people’s rights to food, water, health and education. The Philippines appreciated efforts to eradicate the worst forms of child labour, and action taken to reduce cases or the incidence of human trafficking. 53. Poland expressed concern about the proper implementation of the law regarding preventing violence against women and children and about reports of discrimination against women and children. 54. Portugal commended the Plurinational State of Bolivia for developing human rights indicators in several key priority areas. Portugal asked for further information on a study that had found that 88 per cent of the school population experienced some form of violence. 55. The Republic of Korea noted the standing invitation of the Plurinational State of Bolivia to special procedures and the adoption and implementation of the 2012–2015 Action Plan to eliminate racism and all forms of discrimination, as well as the National Anti-Corruption Plan. 56. Romania appreciated the steps taken to meet the commitments to uphold human rights standards upon the election of the Plurinational State of Bolivia as a member of the Human Rights Council. 57. The Russian Federation commended the Plurinational State of Bolivia for expanding access to drinking water, medical care, telephone links, electricity, water supplies and modern housing. It noted efforts to combat poverty and progress made in ensuring freedom of belief, improving the situation of children and gender equality. 58. Responding to additional questions, the State party indicated that it had recently adopted a constitutional decision permitting a procedure in cases of permitted legal abortion, based on the right of women and mothers to decide. In the Plurinational State of Bolivia, no court order or proceedings were currently required for that right to be exercised. 59. Regarding the right of children to work, a Children and Adolescents Code had been adopted; the adoption process had proved a truly extraordinary experience, during which many child workers in the country had mobilized and asserted their right to work. Bolivian legislation complied with international treaties, particularly an International Labour Organization convention regarding the matter; however, all laws passed in the Plurinational State of Bolivia aimed to reflect the objective reality that they attempted to regulate. The work of minors, within the limits set by international treaties and the Bolivian Constitution, was protected. 60. One of the ongoing tasks was the construction of a criminal system that protected individuals’ lives and freedom. In the Plurinational State of Bolivia, there were many cases in which accused persons attempted to hold up proceedings that were, unfortunately, against the interests of the State. Proceedings against persons who had attempted to destabilize or divide the country were drawn out by incidents created by the accused themselves. Regulations were being drawn up to correct the situation. 61. There had been no amendments to an old law on the press which was still in force, guaranteeing the right to freedom of expression. Although regulations had been adopted, at no time had they been regulations intended to restrict the rights of the communication media or freedom of expression, rather they had been laws that had recognized journalists’ rights, such as the law known as “Hermanos Peñasco Layme”. 62. Senegal took note of positive efforts for the protection of human rights, in particular the economic policy. 63. Sierra Leone commended the Plurinational State of Bolivia for achievements in the socioeconomic sphere, addressing women’s rights, promoting human rights training, and including native languages in various teaching programmes. 64. Singapore noted the passing of the Comprehensive Act on guaranteeing a life free of violence for women and the Gender-based Political Harassment and Violence Act, as well as efforts to promote gender equality in employment and leadership positions. 65. Slovakia welcomed legislative steps taken since the first UPR cycle. It noted that the issue of child labour remained a concern and that justice required further progress and reform. 66. Slovenia noted a Constitutional Court ruling establishing that, in cases of rape, victims needed to report the offence in order to be able to have an abortion, rather than to have to press charges. Slovenia expressed concern about the legislation allowing children as young as 10 to work legally. 67. South Africa commended the concept of buen vivir, which called for greater accountability over patterns of consumption and production, including by transnational corporations and other business enterprises. 68. Spain congratulated the Government on the adoption of Law 348 to guarantee women a life free of violence, with an integral focus on women’s protection, in which feminicide was classed as a crime. It expressed concern about living conditions and overcrowding in prisons. 69. Sri Lanka congratulated the Plurinational State of Bolivia for achieving the Millennium Development Goal relating to extreme poverty. It also noted efforts to develop the health and education sectors. It further commended the legislative and administrative steps taken to ensure the economic and social development of women, and providing for equal access to political rights. 70. The State of Palestine noted the establishment of the National Committee against Racism and All Forms of Discrimination, and the creation of a Vice Minister for Decolonization. It also acknowledged efforts to improve the situation of the most vulnerable members of the population. 71. Sweden noted the new legislation which lowered the minimum age for child labour to 10 years. Sweden also noted that the new law lowered the age of criminal responsibility from 16 to 14 years. 72. Switzerland noted that significant improvements in the judicial system were needed and that the implementation of the law to guarantee women a life free from violence should be strengthened. 73. The Syrian Arab Republic commended steps to fight extreme poverty, such as the establishment of the National Fund for Alternative Development, and the Programa Semilla. 74. Thailand commended efforts to enhance children’s access to education and to increase women’s representation in politics. Thailand looked forward to the effective implementation of the recently enacted laws and institutions established to protect the rights of women and girls. 75. Trinidad and Tobago noted the attainment by the Plurinational State of Bolivia of the Millennium Development Goal related to extreme poverty. It also noted that the right of access to drinking water was enshrined in the Constitution. 76. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland noted the continued emphasis on addressing poverty and inequality. It welcomed the creation of the Torture Prevention Service, urging that it be fully independent of the Ministry of Justice, and that the definition of torture in national legislation be consistent with international law. 77. The United States of America noted the high rates of impunity and immunity for government officials facing corruption charges, prolonged preventative detention, politically motivated prosecutions and executive interference in the judiciary. 78. Uruguay underscored the ratification of a number of international treaties, the open invitation to the special procedures of the Human Rights Council, and advances in the reduction of extreme poverty and in equitable distribution of income. 79. Ghana welcomed measures to reduce poverty, improve and expand access to safe drinking water and steps taken to ensure that aboriginal campesino nations had access to education meaningful to their culture. 80. Viet Nam congratulated the Plurinational State of Bolivia for the recent achievements in the field of human rights and improvement of people’s living standards. 81. Algeria encouraged the Plurinational State of Bolivia to continue efforts for the promotion and protection of human rights, notably regarding the fight against extreme poverty, justice, the right to education, the right to health, and women’s rights. 82. Angola commended the progress made in the promotion and protection of human rights since the previous UPR. Angola also praised the efforts made to combat extreme poverty. Angola noted the Social and Community Housing Programme, which reduced housing deficits in rural areas. 83. Argentina congratulated the Plurinational State of Bolivia for its efforts to address discrimination, in particular the Plan of Action 2012–2015, which promoted the adoption of policies and legislation to eliminate racial discrimination. 84. Australia noted the legislation being considered by the Congress which required it to consult with indigenous peoples as part of policy formulation. Australia welcomed the work to address challenges faced by the justice system. Australia expressed concern that the Boy, Girl and Adolescent Code exposed children to potential labour exploitation. 85. Austria commended the ratification of international instruments and the good cooperation between the Plurinational State of Bolivia and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Austria regretted reports of the mistreatment and unjustified punishment of inmates, and overcrowding. Austria expressed concern about the ineffectiveness of the judicial system. 86. Bangladesh welcomed action to implement recommendations from the first cycle. It regretted that the commitment for overseas development assistance to developing countries had not been realized, hindering the struggle against extreme poverty and the full enjoyment of human rights. 87. Belarus noted comprehensive measures taken in the area of labour relations, with guarantees of stable employment and decent wages. Belarus welcomed efforts to combat trafficking in persons. 88. While taking note of positive developments, Belgium noted however that the situation of women and girls, as well as of children, remained a concern. 89. Benin congratulated the Plurinational State of Bolivia for the recent ratification of international human rights instruments. It requested the support of the international community with a view to allowing the country to step up its action on the protection of human rights in the country. 90. Bhutan was pleased to note the efforts of the Plurinational State of Bolivia in reducing poverty and income equality. It further commended the State party for its efforts to promote and protect the rights of women and children and to implement the recommendations from the first review. 91. Brazil noted progress made regarding the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, as well as the standing invitation extended to the special procedures and the fight against all forms of discrimination. It noted however the persistence of challenges with regard to the eradication of child labour. 92. Burundi welcomed efforts, in particular with regard to policies and strategic plans, including to address racism and other forms of discrimination. It encouraged the Plurinational State of Bolivia to continue advancing in the promotion and protection of human rights. 93. Canada asked the delegation about the implementation of Law 348 to protect women and guarantee them a life free from violence, including identifying institutions responsible for overseeing the implementation of the law. It remained concerned about the use of pretrial detention in the Plurinational State of Bolivia. 94. Chile highlighted the recent ratification of the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, which would require a high degree of implementation. 95. China highlighted that the Plurinational State of Bolivia had increased investment in education, protecting people’s right to decent work and fair and reasonable pay. China noted the particular attention paid to the protection of the rights of women, children, the elderly, the disabled, indigenous peoples, refugees and migrants. 96. Colombia highlighted the commitment and efforts made by the Plurinational State of Bolivia to implement the recommendations received during the first review, as well as the transparency and cooperation with the human rights mechanisms. 97. Costa Rica congratulated the Plurinational State of Bolivia for progress made since the previous review. It remained concerned however about the situation of women, the weaknesses in the administration of justice and the persistence of discrimination as a structural problem. 98. Croatia welcomed progress made in improving public health services and education, as well as steps taken towards poverty reduction. It encouraged the Plurinational State of Bolivia to make further improvements in the justice sector. 99. Egypt noted the ongoing process for signing of the Inter-American Convention against Racism, Racial Discrimination and Related Forms of Intolerance. Egypt also positively noted efforts to prepare the following stage of the National Human Rights Action Plan, as well as the anticipated adoption of the Patriotic Agenda, aimed at eradicating extreme poverty. 100. The Czech Republic recognized the important role of human rights defenders in the protection of human rights. With regard to protection against torture, it welcomed steps taken to establish a national preventive mechanism. 101. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea took note of achievements in the fight against extreme poverty and the strengthening of the sociopolitical and judicial system to ensure the human rights of the people. It congratulated the Plurinational State of Bolivia for its election to the Human Rights Council. 102. Denmark indicated that the Plurinational State of Bolivia had accepted the recommendation of Denmark in 2009 to avoid further delays in the appointment of members of the highest judicial authorities. According to the State party’s own evaluation, the new appointments had not however led to the expected change. It took note that the State party was currently preparing a new plan for the justice sector. 103. The Dominican Republic highlighted progress made since the previous review, in particular with regard to the rights of campesinos and the reduction of extreme poverty, and the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. 104. Responding to additional comments regarding Act No. 348 on violence against women, the Plurinational State of Bolivia indicated that the law had been promulgated in 2013 and its regulations adopted later through a regulatory decree. The Act was the responsibility of the Ministry of Justice, which had established the Comprehensive Plurinational System for Gender-Based Violence Prevention, Assistance, Sanctioning and Eradication, more commonly known as SIPPASE. The Act defined more than 20 crimes, which were included in the Criminal Code. 105. Regarding human trafficking, the Plurinational State of Bolivia indicated that there was a law and a Plurinational Council against Human Trafficking and Smuggling, with all the authorities involved in the matter. There were departmental councils in the country’s nine departments, which met periodically to examine the issue. There were also public policies, a plan regarding trafficking was already in force, and agreements with neighbouring countries were about to be signed with a view to eradicating the problem. 106. The Plurinational State of Bolivia further reiterated that it accepted, with the greatest respect and humility, all the recommendations made in a healthy and positive way. Bolivia welcomed the fact that the great majority of country representatives had valued the efforts that the Plurinational State of Bolivia was making to build a better society for its people. The St considered comments made by some delegations to be unwarranted. 107. The independence of the judiciary was one of the most important issues for the Plurinational State of Bolivia. The Constitution had established the direct and democratic election of judicial authorities by means of a popular election to guarantee their independence. Additionally, the State party had been working to review and improve all Bolivian legislation. 108. Regarding comments made on corruption, the Plurinational State of Bolivia indicated that the claims were unjustified. Since the implementation of the Assembly, a number of laws had been introduced to address corruption. Any former government officials, including some who had served in the current government, who had been tried were serving custodial sentences for corruption. The Plurinational State of Bolivia was fighting a decisive, head-on battle against all forms of corruption. 109. The Plurinational State of Bolivia had not adopted legislation which was against children. The legislation adopted took into account the current situation in the State party, as in other countries. 110. Transitional measures had been put in place to recognize and protect defined age groups of children, to achieve minimum labour conditions which would allow them to work, protected in some cases under various forms of supervision, control and monitoring. The Plurinational State of Bolivia would succeed in putting in place protection mechanisms and hopefully in the next five years during the next cycle of the UPR, it would be able to say with satisfaction and dignity that it had eliminated child labour, particularly for younger children, in accordance with the agreements which it respected and had ratified. 111. With regard to freedom of expression, the Plurinational State of Bolivia reiterated that no journalists were persecuted, in prison, or being prosecuted. All the trials that were under way were based on the Printing Act, which was a law that was defended by the journalism sector; it was a very old law, almost 100 years old. He reiterated that additional laws had been adopted, while journalists had wide-ranging freedoms in his country. 112. To conclude, the Plurinational State of Bolivia thanked delegations for their congratulations on the State party’s becoming a member of the Human Rights Council. The State party would make its best efforts to contribute to constructing a human rights culture, in harmony with Mother Earth, in which all countries submitted equally to all instruments and institutions, in order that, together and collectively, States could build a better world in which human rights were protected. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations** 113. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue/listed below have been examined by the Plurinational State of Bolivia and enjoy the support of the State party: 113.1 Incorporate the Rome Statute into national law (Mexico); 113.2 Consider ratifying the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Convention against Discrimination in Education (Ghana); 113.3 Ratify the UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education and ensure that primary education is free and compulsory for all (Portugal); 113.4 Ratify the Protocol to the American Convention for Human Rights (Norway); 113.5 Further strengthening, as to its funding and independence, of the national preventive mechanism under the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (OP-CAT) so that it can function effectively and impartially (Czech Republic); 113.6 Explore the possibility of creating a monitoring system for international recommendations to facilitate the systematization and follow-up to the recommendations of the human rights bodies and special procedures (Paraguay); 113.7 Conclude as soon as possible the drafting of the National Human Rights Plan of Action (para. 31 of the National Report) (Peru); 113.8 Continue the process of developing human rights indicators (Paraguay); 113.9 Finish the development of indicators for the human right to water and sanitation, combating trafficking and smuggling of human beings, and access to justice and fair trial (Peru); 113.10 Implement promptly the Patriotic Agenda 2025 (Nicaragua); 113.11 Protect the social status of the family as the basic unit of the social structure (Egypt); 113.12 Continue its positive efforts to further reduce extreme poverty by redistributing wealth among the most needy through appropriate welfare benefits (Malaysia); 113.13 Continue providing the necessary fund to support its supply of drinking water programme (Malaysia); 113.14 Ensure that any death in custody is investigated by an independent and impartial authority (Austria); 113.15 Take effective measures to bring conditions of detention in line with international standards by reducing overcrowding, improving the situation of juveniles and women in prison and promoting non-custodial measures (Austria); 113.16 Introduce an effective plan focusing on the human rights of persons deprived of their liberty, especially children living in prison with their parents, who were deprived of liberty (Poland); 113.17 Take steps to improve prison conditions by reducing overcrowding in line with the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners; implement alternatives to detention; ensure access to a timely trial for those on remand; and address the issue of children living with parents in prison (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 113.18 Bring conditions of detention into conformity with the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners and develop protection measures for women deprived of their liberty, in line with the Bangkok Rules, as well for children living in prison with a parent (Switzerland); 113.19 Continue to seek measures to avoid children staying with their imprisoned parents who are serving prison sentences, so as not to expose them to conditions that may affect their development (Uruguay); 113.20 Ensure that the new plan for a reorganization of the justice sector, as mentioned in the Government Program 2015–2020, guarantees the impartiality of the courts, full access for all citizens, and sufficient resources at all levels (Denmark); 113.21 Continue to work with other partners to reform its justice system through training programmes (Australia); 113.22 Pursue and reinforce judicial reforms initiated and improve access to justice in all its territory, with a view to consolidating the independence and efficiency of the judicial system (Switzerland); 113.23 Continue promoting access to justice as a mean to combat violations of rights, in particular those of persons deprived of their liberty (Brazil); 113.24 Take concrete measures to guarantee access to justice as well as fair and timely public trials by allocating sufficient resources to the judiciary and by improving the administration of justice (Austria); 113.25 Adopt further measures to reduce prison overcrowding, inter alia through reducing the rate of pretrial detention (Czech Republic); 113.26 Thoroughly investigate the human rights violations committed between 1964 and 1982 to bring those responsible to justice and ensure full and effective reparation for victims (Ireland); 113.27 Improve protection mechanisms for migrants and consider establishing return programmes for migrants (Philippines); 113.28 Adopt a national action plan on Security Council resolution 1325 on Women, Peace and Security (Portugal); 113.29 Closely follow guidelines in the relevant General Assembly resolutions in its endeavours to prevent and combat violence against women and children (Thailand); 113.30 Increase efforts to pass legislation on sexual and reproductive rights in accordance with the international obligations assumed under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Uruguay); 113.31 Revise penal laws regarding the criminalization of women and girls in cases of abortion as well as of the doctors who practise it (Uruguay); 113.32 Improve the allocation of human and financial resources to the Ombudsman Offices for Children and Adolescents and Prosecutors Offices to effectively combat and address violence against children and adolescents (Chile); 113.33 Continue with major coordinated efforts of the State, civil society and other relevant actors to fulfil the Plurinational Plan for Children, Childhood and Adolescence, implementation expected from 2014 to 2025, while considering the importance deserved by the empowerment of beneficiaries, and the sensitization of society for a proper inclusion (Ecuador); 113.34 Pursue efforts to implement the Plurinational Plan for Infants, Children and Adolescents 2014–2025 (Algeria); 113.35 Introduce effective and comprehensive measures to prevent violence against children and to eliminate the worst forms of child labour (Poland); 113.36 Protect children and adolescents who are working and are obliged to work, through implementation of real and effective policies that consider their family situation, taking into account the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Sweden); 113.37 Finalize the five-year national plan for the prevention and gradual eradication of the worst forms of child labour and the protection of adolescent workers, and take appropriate measures to implement it (Syrian Arab Republic); 113.38 Take additional measures to prevent abuse of children, particularly in schools, to investigate such abuses and bring perpetrators to trial (Montenegro); 113.39 Take all necessary measures to bring its legislation on child labour in line with international obligations and continue implementing the programmes that provide education facilities for working children (Netherlands); 113.40 Address the issue of violence in schools as matter of priority and take the appropriate measures to put an end to all forms of ill-treatment and abuses, including sexual violence, perpetrated in schools, including the necessary measures to protect the victims and to ensure that those responsible are brought to justice (Portugal); 113.41 Develop and implement programmes to eradicate the worst forms of child labour, such as mining of rivers and brick factories (Sweden); 113.42 Make every effort to eradicate hazardous forms of child labour and sexual exploitation of minors and ensure that the offences are effectively investigated and prosecuted (Republic of Korea); 113.43 Take all available measures to prevent all forms of violence against children and to bring cases of abuse to justice (Sweden); 113.44 Ensure that the recently adopted legislation on the minimum legal age to work is properly applied (Italy); 113.45 Strengthen access to the rights to education of infants, without discrimination, including the improvement of educational infrastructure, with a particular emphasis on the infant population in rural areas, and children and adolescents living on the streets. Implement human rights education and training programmes aimed at combating discrimination based on ethnicity (Colombia); 113.46 Ensure that legislation on consultation with indigenous groups is well-formed, takes into account indigenous peoples’ concerns, and is effectively implemented (Australia). 114. The following enjoy the support of the Plurinational State of Bolivia which considers that they are already implemented or in the process of implementation. 114.1 Continue to ratify the relevant universal human rights instruments to which it is not yet a contracting party (Romania); 114.5 Pursue actions to achieve the Millennium Development Goals (Senegal); 114.6 Pursue this very important work [developing human rights indicators in several key priority areas], which strengthens the human rights implementation on the ground (Portugal); 114.7 Continue to actively implement strategies and programmes for protection and social support of vulnerable groups (Russian Federation); 114.8 Strengthen programmes aiming at the enjoyment of the fundamental rights of the Bolivian people (Benin); 114.9 Introduce gender equality issues, as well as non-discrimination and non-violence due to gender identity and sexual orientation in education programmes, in school regulations and in the training of teachers (Colombia); 114.10 Continue its policy to ensure comprehensive protection of citizens’ economic, social and cultural rights (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 114.11 Continue promoting its accurate social protection programs (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 114.12 Continue its firm social investment policies (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 114.13 Introduce further measures to sustain and reinforce progress made in poverty reduction (Viet Nam); 114.14 Pursue efforts to combat extreme poverty, notably within the framework of the Patriotic Agenda 2025 (Algeria); 114.15 Strengthen its policies and programmes to continue reducing extreme poverty in the country (Cuba); 114.16 Continue its efforts with a view to combating poverty and to make social services accessible for all the components of society (Kuwait); 114.17 Pursue efforts regarding the fight against extreme poverty (Morocco); 114.18 Continue to push forward economic and social development and prioritize eradication of poverty and to further improve the living standards of the people (China); 114.19 Pursue its strategic policy emphasizing the universality of care and access to health services (Equatorial Guinea); 114.20 Guarantee universal access to health services and institutions (Senegal); 114.21 Implement the Strategic National Plan on Sexual and Reproductive Health 2009–2015, including allocating adequate budgetary resources for its full and effective implementation. The Plurinational State of Bolivia should ensure efficient access to information for women and girls about their rights. (Finland); 114.22 Increase its efforts to implement the national literacy programs in peri-urban and rural areas (Equatorial Guinea); 114.23 Continue its efforts in implementing the Plan on Human Rights Education as part of the State ’s human rights education system (Indonesia); 114.24 Continue its efforts to provide greater access to education and employment (Pakistan); 114.25 Continue to pay attention to ensuring the exercise of the right to education for all (Belarus); 114.26 Continue strengthening its inclusive and accurate education policy (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 114.27 Promote human rights through education and training (Senegal); 114.28 Further progress in the implementation of the National Literacy Programs “Yes I can” and “Yes I can continue” (Nicaragua); 114.29 Continue to attach importance to environmental protection and achieve harmonious development of people and nature (China); 114.30 Make continued efforts in promoting sustainable development of health sector, while strengthening the partnership with the local community in delivering high-quality health services to all citizens (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 114.31 Strengthen efforts to adequately implement policy, legislative, regulatory and administrative measures to combat discrimination, towards social inclusion (Ecuador); 114.32 Redouble efforts to implement anti-discrimination laws and policies, including through more intensive public awareness campaign (Philippines); 114.33 Ensure the rigorous implementation of the anti-discrimination legislation in order to ensure the respect of the rights of all Bolivian citizens (Romania); 114.34 Establish mechanisms for the evaluation and follow-up of the implementation of human rights public policies and programmes, in particular those referred to the fight against discrimination in all its forms and on any grounds, taking into account the recommendations from the universal periodic review and other human rights mechanisms (Colombia); 114.35 Address the underlying structural factors regarding discrimination against indigenous peoples and Afro-Bolivians and set and monitor the implementation of concrete equality targets (Republic of Korea); 114.36 Continue its efforts to fully implement the 2012–2015 plan of action against racism and all forms of discrimination (State of Palestine); 114.37 Take further measures to combat racism and all forms of discrimination, especially with respect to women, children, indigenous people and Afro-Bolivians (Trinidad and Tobago); 114.38 Sustain its National Action Plan against Racism and All Forms of Discrimination and continue to implement it at all levels (Indonesia); 114.39 Prosecute all cases of racial violence and discrimination (Sierra Leone); 114.40 Implement human rights education and training programmes aimed at combating discrimination based on ethnic origin (Costa Rica); 114.41 Boost its activities to combat discrimination against migrant workers (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 114.42 Take steps to complete the establishment of the National Preventive Mechanism in accordance with OP-CAT (Ghana); 114.43 Complete the national process on the establishment of a National Preventative Mechanism in accordance with OP-CAT (South Africa); 114.44 Continue its efforts to combat corruption and strengthen the rule of law (Singapore); 114.45 Reinforce the mandates of the National Council to Fight Corruption (Senegal); 114.46 Strengthen the legislative provisions concerning on equality (Equatorial Guinea); 114.47 Prevent deaths in custody and punish those responsible for such deaths (Ghana); 114.48 Strengthen trans-boundary checkpoints, and the specialized security and judicial authorities to combat human trafficking (Lebanon); 114.49 Strengthen actions to ensure the effective implementation of legislation aiming at reducing and eliminating trafficking and smuggling of persons (Argentina); 114.50 Establish a policy concerning the return of victims of human trafficking and their rehabilitation and reintegration into the work market (Lebanon); 114.51 Step up efforts to combat crime to work on national plan of action against human trafficking and to prevent sexual slavery and violence in the family (Russian Federation); 114.52 Establish standard operating procedures for the identification of victims of human trafficking (Trinidad and Tobago); 114.53 Develop the measures in the area of combating human trafficking and this includes by expanding regional and international cooperation (Belarus); 114.54 Continue prevention, protection and assistance for the victims of trafficking (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 114.55 Establish legislation to monitor and address human trafficking (Sierra Leone); 114.56 Urgently review the legal grounds and practice of pretrial detention that will effectively limit its use and duration (Hungary); 114.57 Take steps, including allocating adequate resources, to strengthen the capacity and independence of the judiciary to improve the fair and timely administration of justice (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 114.58 Incorporate the recommendations from treaty monitoring bodies and from the special procedures regarding the administration of justice within the Sectorial Plan for Plural Justice 2013–2025 (Costa Rica); 114.59 Increase measures aiming at guaranteeing an efficient justice system, including the effective access to legal representation, paying particular attention to recommendations made by the Committee against Torture (Chile); 114.60 Guarantee fully the independence of the judiciary, in conformity with relevant international norms (France); 114.61 Respect and fortify the independence of the judiciary to ensure the fair and equal application of justice and the rule of law (United States of America); 114.62 Reinforce measures to ensure that the judiciary is independent and free of political and economic interference and combat irregularities and delays in the administration of justice (Croatia); 114.63 Initiate a comprehensive set of measures to address existing inefficiencies within the judicial system including ensuring efficient prosecution and crime prevention while guaranteeing judicial independence, including that of the constitutional court. This also comprises the provision of social rehabilitation, reduction of time needed for investigative custody and taking steps to avoid prison overcrowding (Germany); 114.64 Take all necessary measures to ensure the independence and the correct operation of the judiciary (Italy); 114.65 Continue to take further steps for enhancing access to justice (India); 114.66 Reduce delays in investigations and prosecutions by police, judges and prosecutors by creating mechanisms to fully implement legal and constitutional provisions guaranteeing access to justice for both victims of crime and offenders (Canada); 114.67 Expeditiously and fully investigate and prosecute acts of violence and discrimination targeting women, indigenous, and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) persons and guarantee an effective remedy to victims and their families (Ireland); 114.68 Reinforce existing legislation to ensure a fair judicial treatment, especially for the most vulnerable categories, such as women and children (Italy); 114.69 Respect legislation on maximum duration of pretrial detention, and implement alternatives to preventive detention (Norway); 114.70 Continue increasing efforts to create an independent and autonomous truth commission in accordance with international standards, that may enable the establishment of a fair and transparent mechanism to ensure effective remedy for victims of human rights violations (Uruguay); 114.71 Further advance to democratize communication and information (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 114.72 Ensure security and protection of all journalists and media-institutions, and that legislation complies with international standards on free speech (Norway); 114.73 Ensure that journalists and reporters can freely exercise their right to freedom of expression (Israel); 114.74 Reinforce ongoing measures for the promotion of freedom of expression, freedom of association and freedom of the press (Senegal); 114.75 Continue promoting the active participation and empowerment of young people in the processes of national decision-making (Nicaragua); 114.76 Review respective legislation to eliminate the requirement of prior judicial authorization for therapeutic abortion and abortion in cases of rape and incest (Slovenia); 114.77 Create regulations and public policies in favour of sexual and reproductive rights, especially those of women and indigenous population (Mexico); 114.78 Recognize migrants and their families as a vulnerable group and implement measures in law and in practice for the protection and promotion of their rights (Mexico); 114.79 Strengthen and increase current efforts, including through international cooperation, aimed at protecting the rights of children and women, with a particular emphasis on combating violence against women and social exclusion, in line with international instruments that the Plurinational State of Bolivia is party to (Brazil); 114.80 Continue to pay attention to women-and children-related issues (India); 114.81 Continue working to eliminate gender stereotypes and conduct awareness-raising campaigns at the national level in order to combat it. (Guatemala); 114.82 Ensure that gender issues and women’s rights are mainstreamed in all Government programmes, particularly in labour and employment and anti.poverty measures (Philippines); 114.83 Approve appropriate budget allocations and resources for the protection of women and women programmes, particularly in the areas of justice, health and equal opportunities (Spain); 114.84 Continue its efforts to achieve gender equality and tackle discrimination against women in law and in practice (Pakistan); 114.85 Increase ongoing action to eliminate discrimination against women at all levels in society (Sri Lanka); 114.86 Continue current efforts to promote and protect the rights of rural women (Syrian Arab Republic); 114.87 Increase efforts to promote gender equality, especially with regard to work opportunities and health access, and to introduce gender components into education and professional training (Italy); 114.88 Fully implement Comprehensive Act 348 on Guaranteeing a Life Free of Violence for Women (South Africa); 114.89 Increase efforts to prevent violence against women, particularly domestic and sexual violence (Montenegro); 114.90 Pursue efforts regarding the fight on violence against women (Morocco); 114.91 Continue to implement policies to protect women against violence and promote gender equality (Singapore); 114.92 Continue its efforts to overcome gaps and implement provisions to address gender violence as well as to carry out prompt, thorough and impartial investigations into all complaints of gender-based violence (Slovenia); 114.93 Take all necessary measures to ensure effective access to justice to victims of gender violence (Belgium); 114.94 Provide sufficient resources to institutions responsible for implementing Law 348, the legislation that guarantees women a life free from violence, in order to improve access to justice and to ensure accountability in cases of violence against women (Canada); 114.95 Take specific measures to fight violence against women (France); 114.96 Take effective measures to further implement the normative framework for combating violence against women, including by allocating sufficient resources for the construction of shelters for victims (Republic of Korea); 114.97 Implement comprehensive measures to eliminate violence against women and sexual abuse of children (Sierra Leone); 114.98 Reinforce instances established by law to combat violence against women and put in place a system for the protection, prevention and effective punishment, in favour of women victims of violence (Switzerland); 114.99 Establish more administrative instruments and allocate more funds with a view to effective implementation of legislation on combating violence against women (Viet Nam); 114.100 Undertake awareness-raising campaigns to sensitize law enforcement officials and the judiciary on violence against women and girls, within the framework of the new Law 348, the Comprehensive Act on guaranteeing a life free of violence for women (Belgium); 114.101 Implement effectively the new legal framework to guarantee women a life free from violence, providing all necessary resources to implement programmes for the attention of victims and to undertake training activities on violence and discrimination against women (Chile); 114.102 Strengthen measures to prevent violence against women, in particular by raising awareness of the fact that discrimination and violence against women is unacceptable, and implement legislation on violence against women and girls. Make more efforts to create a unified register on violence against women (Croatia); 114.103 Establish shelters and provide further social services for victims of domestic violence (Czech Republic); 114.104 Secure the necessary resources for the effective implementation of the law against abuse of women, in particular through the strengthening of the special police force to combat gender-based violence (FELCV) so that it can fulfil its mandate (Denmark); 114.105 Effectively implement the legal provisions of law that combat gender violence (Israel); 114.106 Swiftly adopt the necessary implementing legislation to ensure effective prevention of violence against women and punishment of the offenders (Italy); 114.107 Implement policies to comprehensively address violence, labour, political and access to justice problems faced by women (Costa Rica); 114.108 Create tools to effectively address domestic violence (Israel); 114.109 Establish without further delay shelters to protect women and girls from violence and effectively implement the legislation already adopted (Austria); 114.110 Continue measures aiming at combating gender violence, with special focus on the investigation and punishment of those responsible (Argentina); 114.111 In order to achieve a full and effective implementation of the Strategic National Plan on Sexual and Reproductive Health, mobilize adequate resources to improve access of women to the justice system (Netherlands); 114.112 Protect the reproductive rights of girls and women, adopting legal reforms that eliminate the requirement for prior judicial authorization for abortion (Israel); 114.113 Develop necessary programmes in order to promote the economic and social development of women, especially in rural areas (Egypt); 114.114 More effectively address the issue of overcrowding in prisons and children living in prison with their families (Sierra Leone); 114.115 Review the new legislation on child labour and consider developing a national plan to reduce child labour (Slovenia); 114.116 Following up on a 2010 recommendation, fully implement the National Plan for the Prevention and Gradual Eradication of the Worst Forms of Child Labour and the Protection of Adolescent Workers (Germany); 114.117 Pursue efforts to address child labour in line with its international obligations (Slovakia); 114.118 Further strengthen measures to protect children from all forms of violence (Sri Lanka); 114.119 Put in place measures that are in line with the international standards, especially the ILO Conventions No. 138 (1973) concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment and No. 182 (1999) concerning the Worst Forms of Child Labour (Thailand); 114.120 Safeguard the rights of children and adolescents and enhance the protection accorded to them against all forms of violence, including by, inter alia, the conclusion of the Five Year Plan for the Prevention and Gradual Eradication of the Worst Forms of Child Labour and the Protection of Adolescent Workers (Egypt); 114.121 Ensure that the Code for Children and Adolescents and other relevant domestic legislation and practice are in full compliance with the requirements of ILO Convention No. 138 (United States of America); 114.122 Put in place legislation that protects children from labour exploitation through a minimum working age, consistent with its international legal obligations (Australia); 114.123 Implement effective policies to tackle cases of physical, psychological and sexual abuse against children (Italy); 114.124 Continue its efforts to adopt more measures to keep children in school, and ensure that girls, indigenous children, and children with disabilities are able to exercise fully their right to education (State of Palestine); 114.125 Advance in the implementation of human rights to live in harmony with Mother Earth (Cuba); 114.126 Continue its policy against racism and all forms of discrimination particularly in favour of indigenous peoples (Angola); 114.127 Take further steps to ensure that the indigenous peoples justice system is at all times compliant with due process and other guarantees established in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Finland); 114.128 Increase access to justice for sectors of the population, especially for those who live in rural areas (Trinidad and Tobago); 114.129 Intensify its efforts to access to education for indigenous peoples and other disadvantaged communities and groups (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 114.130 Ensure equal access to education for indigenous peoples, Afro-Bolivians and other disadvantaged communities and groups (Ghana); 114.131 Continue to make progress on the participation and consultation of indigenous peoples, including on mining (Spain); 114.132 Promote policies to allow indigenous peoples and minorities access to the National Literacy Programme, the National Post-literacy Programme and bilingual intercultural education (Dominican Republic). 115. The recommendations below did not enjoy the support of the Plurinational State of Bolivia and would thus be noted: ** Conclusions and recommendations will not be edited. 114.2  Pursue its cooperation with human rights mechanisms (Benin);  114.3  Cooperate with treaty bodies, submitting pending reports (Israel);  114.4  Enhance its cooperation with OHCHR (Kuwait);  115.1 Provide a legislative framework for the eradication of child labour in accordance with its human rights obligations (Germany); 115.2 Pay more attention to the problems related to the independence of the judicial process (Croatia); 115.3 Advance in the commitment to incorporate into the national human rights law the United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, with special attention to labour rights, rights of indigenous communities and environmental rights (Spain); 115.4 Repeal or modify legal norms that deny or limit the rights of people based on their sexual orientation or gender identity (Israel); 115.5 Develop a strategic plan to prevent the high rate of school dropout and eradicate child labour (Mexico); 115.6 Adopt ILO Convention No. 138 (1973) concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment so that no child under 14 years of age is engaged in an apprenticeship, and ensure that Children and Adolescents’ Defence Committees have adequate resources to fulfil their tasks (Norway); 115.7 Continue taking necessary measures to fully eradicate child labour, without exception, in conformity with ILO Convention No. 138, ratified by the Plurinational State of Bolivia (Belgium); 115.8 Amend Law 548 on child labour to meet the State’s international human rights obligations on the minimum working age for children, to prohibit child labour in hazardous conditions, protect children from economic exploitation, protect children from any work that is likely to interfere with their education, and progressively raise the minimum age of employment (Canada); 115.9 Protect and fulfil children’s rights, eradicating child labour and the sexual exploitation of minors (Israel); 115.10 Develop a National Strategic Plan for the Progressive Elimination of Child Labour, with short-and medium-term goals as well as follow-up and evaluation mechanisms, both quantitative and qualitative, and endowed with financial resources for its implementation at the national, departmental and municipal level (Spain); 115.11 Step up reform of the justice system with a view to addressing effectively access to justice, interference in judicial proceedings and the backlog of cases (Slovakia); 115.12 Take legislative as well as practical steps to ensure that judicial procedures including that against Mr. Tóásó are conducted in a just, transparent, and impartial manner, in full respect of human rights norms, including the recommendations of United Nations mechanisms (Hungary); 115.13 Adopt measures to end violations to due process in judicial proceedings (Israel); 115.14 Ensure the protection of human rights defenders and journalists as well as efficient and impartial investigation of threats and attacks targeting them (Czech Republic); 115.15 Recognize that independent and free media are an essential component of a functioning democracy, and allow all journalists and media outlets to operate without fear (United States of America). 116. The Plurinational State of Bolivia considers that the above-mentioned recommendations in paragraph 115 are not up to date, and do not reflect the current situation. 117. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of the Plurinational State of Bolivia was headed by Mr. Héctor Enrique Arce Zaconeta, Procurador General del Estado, and composed of the following members: • Sr. 	Héctor Enrique Arce Zaconeta, Procurador General del Estado – Jefe de la Delegación; • Sra. Sandra Elizabeth Gutiérrez Salazar, Ministra de Justicia; • Sra. 	Erika Chávez Barrancos, Subprocuradora de asesoramiento, investigación y producción normativa; • Sr. Nelson Marcelo Cox Mayorga, Director General de justicia indígena originario campesina – Ministerio de Justicia; • Sra. Angélica Navarro Llanos, Embajadora – Representante Permanente del Estado Plurinacional de Bolivia ante Naciones Unidas y otros Organismos Internacionales; • Sra. Maysa Rossana Ureña Menacho, Jefa de Unidad de Políticas Internacionales – Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores; • Sra. 	Anrriela Giovanna Salazar, Jefa de Unidad de Producción Normativa – Procuraduría General del Estado; • Sra 	Daniela Llanos Sangüesa, Ministra Consejera de la Misión Permanente del Estado Plurinacional de Bolivia ante Naciones Unidas y otros Organismos Internacionales; • Sra. Ana del Rosario Durán, Primer Secretario de la Misión Permanente del Estado Plurinacional de Bolivia ante Naciones Unidas y otros Organismos Internacionales. 