Distr.: General 27 March 2014 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-sixth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Cambodia * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.14-12727 *1412727* 
Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–117 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–23 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 24–117 6 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 118–120 14  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 27 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its eighteenth session from 27 January to 7 February 2014. The review of Cambodia was held at the 4th meeting on 28 January 2014. The delegation of Cambodia was headed by H.E. Mr Mak Sambath, Vice-Chair of the National Human Rights Committee of Cambodia. At its 10th meeting held on 31 January 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on Cambodia. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Cambodia: Italy, Morocco and the Philippines. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Cambodia: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/KHM/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/KHM/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/KHM/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, the Czech Republic, Germany, Liechtenstein, Mexico, the Netherlands, Slovenia, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America was transmitted to Cambodia through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation of Cambodia highlighted the importance of the universal periodic review mechanism as a process that gives each State the opportunity to carry out measures to improve the situation of human rights on its territory.  6. The delegation recalled that the fulfilment by Cambodia of its human rights obligations had been reviewed by the Working Group in December 2009 and that the 91 recommendations formulated by the delegations at that time were in line with the policy of the Government. 7. The delegation explained that after the 91 recommendations had been received, the Cambodian authorities appointed a working group chaired by Mr. Mak Sambath and comprised of 21 members from relevant ministries and institutions. The working group cooperated with OHCHR to organize two workshops with the participation of experts from OHCHR, Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines. It also organized five meetings with relevant ministries and institutions and two consultations with civil society organizations. In October 2013, the Council of Ministers, under the auspices of the Prime Minister, adopted the report. 8. The delegation noted the positive achievements, challenges and future goals in seven major areas: ratification of treaties, land rights, rule of law, detention and issues related to torture and ill-treatment, economic, social and cultural rights, women’s rights and children’s rights. 9. The delegation emphasized that Cambodia had ratified nine international conventions. Regarding the two Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), the Cambodian Human Rights Committee, with the assistance of OHCHR, had organized two seminars and meetings with relevant ministries and institutions. 10. Regarding invitations to the special procedures mandate holders, the delegation stated that there was no need for them to be invited, since they could visit Cambodia at any time. It indicated that there were many organizations working on human rights issues in the country, including the Human Rights and Complaints Commission of the National Assembly, the Human Rights and Complaints Commission of the Senate, the Committee itself, hundreds of national and international organizations, including OHCHR, and the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Cambodia. 11. In regard to the issue of land, the delegation noted that the Cambodian authorities continue to register all types of land with the aim of strengthening the security of land ownership. The campaign for the implementation of “old policy, new actions” in the land sector had been launched to carry out the measurement programme for the distribution of land, and residential and rice-field titles had been issued. The authorities had registered 2,845,282 land titles for 500,000 families. Regarding evictions from the land, the delegation stated that certain people were not well informed and that the Government had had to take into consideration the interests and safety of the people and could not let the interests of the majority become a hostage to the interests of a minority. 12. The delegation noted that the Government recognized illegal land ownership, on a temporary basis, for people looking for a legal location in which to reside. It added that representatives had been designated to protect the interests of poor communities. The delegation also explained that in general, notification that a location was going to be developed was sent at least one year in advance.  13. Regarding the lands of indigenous peoples, the delegation emphasized that the Government had policies, regulations and laws to protect and recognize their rights. A sub-decree had been drafted, based on pilot projects of land registration for three indigenous communities. Furthermore, consultations had been carried out with national and international legal experts, the relevant ministries and institutions, development partners, civil society organizations and especially with the indigenous peoples themselves.  14. On the rule of law, the delegation stated that the Government had continued to carry out profound reforms on legal and judiciary issues. To date, 416 laws had been adopted to enhance the legal framework and strengthen the capacity, independence and impartiality of the judiciary institutions. The authorities would continue to work harder to reform the laws by encouraging the drafting of new laws; establishing programmes to increase the awareness of laws; and conducting training for law enforcement officials at all levels. The delegation added that the Government had also pushed to enact the laws related to the judiciary. 15. Noting that elections to the National Assembly took place on 28 July 2013, the delegation stated that all political parties had had access to the media. The National Election Committee had facilitated freedom of expression and public assembly for all. It had also encouraged national and international organizations to get involved in the dissemination of information related to the elections. The delegation noted that the electoral campaign, the vote and the vote counting had been conducted smoothly and that almost all the national and international observers had assessed the electoral process positively. 16. The delegation indicated that, having received recommendations from various sources, such as the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Cambodia, the Government tasked the Ministry of the Interior with organizing, in the first semester of 2014, a national workshop with representatives of the legislative and executive branches, registered political parties, the National Election Committee, civil society and international organizations, development partners and other relevant stakeholders. The aim of this workshop would be to collect opinions, comments and recommendations to assist with drafting electoral reforms. 17. The delegation stated that the authorities had underlined the important role of civil society organizations as an effective partner of the Government. In this regard, it had offered encouragement to associations and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and welcomed their participation in the socioeconomic development of the country and the promotion of democracy and human rights.  18. Regarding the right to association, the delegation mentioned the draft law on associations and NGOs, aimed at providing standards and conditions of registration which would facilitate the activities of associations and local and international NGOs in Cambodia. After discussions with associations, national and international organizations and representatives of other States, the draft law had been submitted to the Council of Ministers, which had unanimously approved it. 19. In regard to freedom of expression, the delegation noted that under article 41of the Constitution, any individual could express his or her opinion and had the right to freedom of expression. The delegation emphasized that the Government had encouraged discussion in public forums and permitted civil society organizations to express their opinions freely. In fact, there were NGOs, such as the Cambodian Human Rights Centre, the Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association, the Cambodian League for the Promotion and Defence of Human Rights, the National Democratic Institute and the International Republican Institute, which disseminated information on human rights and provided training on human rights throughout the country. 20. The delegation explained that in Cambodia there were 721 publishing media, 139 radio stations, 108 TV stations, 127 cable TV channels and countless social media networks which disseminated information without censorship. It further explained that citizens had the right to create their own website and disseminate their opinions freely. 21. Regarding the establishment of a national human rights institution, the delegation noted that a committee had been appointed to draft a law but that it had not worked out. In 2006, the Prime Minister had asked civil society organizations to draft a law based on the Principles relating to the Status of National Institutions (Paris Principles). A Working Group had then carried out a plan of action for drafting the law. Recently, the Prime Minister had proposed holding more discussions on this issue with civil society organizations. Once these consultations have taken place, a national workshop will be organized to collect inputs and recommendations from legal experts and other relevant stakeholders to improve the draft law and then it will be submitted to the Council of Minister for further legal action. 22. In relation to a national preventive mechanism on torture, the delegation stated that, in order to be in line with the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (OP-CAT), in 2009 the Government had issued a sub-decree on the establishment of the mechanism. 23. The delegation noted that in December 2009, members of the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture had visited Cambodia for the first time and in December 2013, a second visit had been undertaken. Members of the Committee had visited prisons and police stations and conducted a seminar on the establishment of the national preventive mechanism. The Ministry of the Interior and OHCHR would be holding discussions on the draft law to ensure that it was in line with OP-CAT. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 24. During the interactive dialogue, 76 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 25. Slovenia commended steps to promote gender awareness and women’s rights. It was concerned that the “didactic code” allowed the perception of women’s inferior role to be taught in schools and that basic education was still not compulsory. Slovenia made recommendations. 26. Spain expressed concern about recent events that had resulted in fatalities. Efforts to ensure the independence of the legal system had been inadequate. Women encountered serious problems when seeking access to justice and were frequently subjected to slave-like conditions in third countries. Problems relating to land ownership and management continued to have a particularly adverse impact on the poor. Spain made recommendations. 27. Sri Lanka welcomed progress made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), particularly in gender equality, child mortality, maternal health, combating disease, child labour and access to education. It commended the establishment of rehabilitation centres for vulnerable groups. It made recommendations. 28. The State of Palestine welcomed efforts to promote the principle of education for all and to address the challenges facing the health sector. It made recommendations. 29. Sweden called for a credible investigation into the shootings in January 2013 and for the removal of the ban on peaceful assemblies. It was concerned that the draft cyber law could restrict freedom of expression. It highlighted the need for reform of the electoral and legal systems. It made a recommendation. 30. Switzerland was concerned by the regression in the rights to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and association. It deplored the lack of improvement in judicial independence and was concerned by allegations of racial discrimination. It made recommendations. 31. Indonesia appreciated efforts to implement the Strategic Plan for Education for the period 2009–2013, promote equitable health rights and reduce poverty. However, it believed that there remained room for improvement in promoting and protecting human rights. It made recommendations. 32. Timor-Leste noted that the right to health was a key priority for Cambodia. It commended its implementation of health policies and strategies and its increased national health budget. It made recommendations. 33. Tunisia welcomed the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CPED) and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (OP-CEDAW). It commended cooperation with the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Cambodia. Tunisia made recommendations. 34. Turkmenistan commended ratification of CRPD, CPED and the Optional Protocol to CEDAW. It praised the measures taken in support of persons with disabilities. Turkmenistan made recommendations. 35. The United Kingdom urged the Government to conduct a credible inquiry into the shootings in January 2013, lift the ban on peaceful assemblies and focus on long-term judicial and political reforms to strengthen democracy and address corruption and the mistreatment of prisoners by the judiciary. It made recommendations. 36. The United States urged the Government to lift the ban on peaceful assemblies, continue strengthening the democratic institutions of Cambodia and expedite its reform of the Criminal Code. It encouraged Cambodia to strengthen its land management mechanisms. It made recommendations. 37. Uruguay welcomed the ratification of CRPD, OP-CEDAW and CPED, the steps taken to submit reports to the treaty bodies, cooperation with the Special Rapporteur and the promulgation of the Criminal Code and the Law on the Implementation of the Civil Code. It made recommendations. 38. Uzbekistan commended the cooperation with the Special Rapporteur and the treaty bodies and welcomed the ratification of CRPD, CPED and the Optional Protocol to CEDAW. It noted progress in the areas of gender equality, the right to education and children’s rights. Uzbekistan made recommendations. 39. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela noted the contribution of equitable, transparent and sustainable management of land distribution and land use to the fight against poverty and social exclusion. It welcomed the promotion of free education, scholarships for the needy and literacy programmes. It made recommendations. 40. Viet Nam appreciated the positive developments in Cambodia, including the recent fair elections and progress on land rights, combating corruption, legal and judicial reform, freedom of expression and better assurance of economic, social and cultural rights. It made recommendations. 41. Algeria noted that accession to a number of international human rights instruments was under consideration, while others had been ratified by Cambodia. It welcomed the progress made in promoting the rights of persons with disabilities. Algeria made recommendations. 42. Angola welcomed the progress made by Cambodia, particularly in health, education and the rights of women and children. It noted with satisfaction the strategies implemented by the Government to overhaul the legal and judicial system. Angola made a recommendation. 43. Mexico commended the cooperation with OHCHR and the submission of reports to the treaty bodies. It made recommendations. 44. Singapore noted the commitment of Cambodia to strengthening the rule of law and implementing judicial reforms through the recent adoption of legislation. It also noted the progress in improving access to education under the Strategic Plan for Education for the period 2009–2013. Singapore made recommendations. 45. Austria shared the concerns of the Special Rapporteur about the protection of human rights. It remained concerned about land seizure, reiterating its recommendation from the first UPR cycle. Austria made recommendations. 46. Azerbaijan commended the efforts made to ensure equitable access to education, the development of maternal and child health programmes and the strengthening of the health system. It also noted measures to promote equality and combat discrimination against women. Azerbaijan made recommendations. 47. Bangladesh noted the priority given to the promotion of women’s roles in society. It also noted that poverty remained a serious impediment to the full enjoyment of human rights, which should be addressed by creating a favourable trade, economic and financial environment and policies at the global level. 48. Belgium was concerned about the deteriorating human rights situation in several areas and about recent developments with respect to freedom of expression, despite some positive developments in the country. Belgium made recommendations. 49. Bhutan appreciated the efforts to bring the legal and judicial systems into line with international standards and to promote and protect the rights of vulnerable groups. It noted that challenges remained in reducing poverty in rural areas. Bhutan made a recommendation. 50. Responding to questions concerning the rights of children, women and the elderly, the delegation reiterated the commitment of Cambodia to addressing these issues. Emphasizing that Cambodia is committed to increasing the representation of women in senior positions within the Government, the delegation noted the existence of quotas for women for such positions.  51. Concerning the electoral system, the delegation stated that the Government intended to undertake a thorough reform of the entire electoral system shortly, beginning with a national consultation workshop scheduled to take place in the first quarter of 2014, which would involve various stakeholders. 52. On the reform of the judiciary, the delegation stated that it expected the National Assembly to adopt three fundamental laws on the judiciary in the first quarter of 2014. 53. Regarding the ban on demonstrations and public assembly in place since 4 January 2014, the delegation stated that the ban was in line with the law on peaceful demonstrations and was very necessary in order to restore social order and stability and security for society at large.  54. With respect to judicial reform under the fifth mandate of the National Assembly, the delegation reiterated that the three fundamental laws, which were due to be submitted to the National Assembly soon, concerned the status of judges and prosecutors, the organization of the courts and the reform of the Supreme Council of Magistracy.  55. Botswana commended the legislative measures to eliminate discrimination against women and raise gender awareness. It was concerned by reports of harassment, intimidation, violence, arbitrary arrests, curtailment of freedom of expression and assembly and infringements of judicial independence. Botswana made recommendations. 56. Brazil welcomed the ratification of CRPD and the development of an action plan on child labour, but was concerned by restrictions on freedom of expression and the persistence of gender-based stereotypes in the didactic code taught in school. Brazil made recommendations. 57. Brunei Darussalam appreciated the measures to promote and protect women’s and children’s rights and combat gender discrimination, and the commitment to improving health services. It welcomed the continued cooperation with the United Nations human rights mechanisms. It made a recommendation. 58. Canada asked what measures had been taken to protect the right to freedom of expression, including assurances that the authorities would not use the Criminal Code or violence to restrict that right. It noted progress towards achieving the MDGs relating to child mortality and maternal health. Canada made recommendations. 59. Chad noted the accession of Cambodia to most international human rights instruments and that it had cooperated with OHCHR and the treaty bodies. It welcomed the efforts to ensure the population’s enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights. Chad made a recommendation. 60. Chile welcomed the ratification of, and accession to, a number of human rights treaties and the enactment of legislation to improve the legislative and institutional framework. It encouraged Cambodia to step up its actions in that regard. Chile made recommendations. 61. China appreciated the efforts made to implement the previous recommendations and congratulated Cambodia on the early achievement of the MDGs relating to gender equality, child mortality, maternal health, combating HIV/AIDS and establishing global development partnerships. It welcomed the ratification of international instruments. China made recommendations. 62. Colombia commended the efforts Cambodia to combat human trafficking, such as the national action plan for the period 2011–2013, and the action to implement CRPD and the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on their Destruction (Ottawa Treaty). Colombia made recommendations. 63. The Congo noted that Cambodia had strengthened its cooperation with the treaty bodies and had recently adopted a new Criminal Code and legislation on fighting corruption and the implementation of the Civil Code. It encouraged the continuation of efforts to ensure the full enjoyment of human rights. 64. Croatia welcomed the legislative improvements to ensure the better protection of persons with disabilities, the ratification of CRPD, CPED and OP-CEDAW. It was concerned by recent reports of attacks on activists, union members and journalists. It made recommendations. 65. Cuba welcomed the ratification of CRPD and CPED and the adoption of the Strategic Plan for Education designed to ensure universal access to education and make improvements to the curriculum. It commended the action plan to eliminate the worst forms of child labour and to improve workplace safety. Cuba made recommendations. 66. The Czech Republic noted that, despite its previous recommendations, freedom of expression in Cambodia had deteriorated. It was concerned about recent crackdowns on peaceful protesters, which had resulted in several deaths. It made recommendations. 67. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea noted that Cambodia had made considerable progress in human rights, especially in implementing recommendations accepted during the UPR first cycle. It encouraged it to continue with its positive efforts. It made recommendations. 68. Denmark was seriously concerned about restrictions on freedom of expression and violence towards, and arrests of, protesters. Legislation and practices should be consistent with ICCPR. It welcomed the ratification of OP-CAT, but remained concerned at the failure to implement it effectively. Denmark made recommendations. 69. Djibouti congratulated Cambodia on all its achievements in the protection and promotion of human rights. It made recommendations. 70. Ecuador welcomed the ratification of CRPD, OP-CEDAW and OP-CAT. It commended the Strategic Plan for Education for the period 2009–2013 and the road map to eradicate child labour by 2016. Ecuador made recommendations. 71. Egypt welcomed the ratification of CRPD and the actions taken to ensure its effective implementation. It commended the judicial reform measures, the new Press Law, the action plan to eliminate the worst forms of child labour and the cooperation with the Special Rapporteur. Egypt made recommendations. 72. France welcomed the Cambodian delegation and thanked it for presenting its national report. France made recommendations. 73. Germany noted efforts to improve the national human rights situation, in particular by reducing human trafficking and child labour. It remained concerned about the ban on demonstrations, the use of force against protesters and their detention without access to legal counsel. Germany made recommendations.  74. Ghana appreciated the progress being made by the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia to punish and deter impunity. It recognized the efforts being made to strengthen the rule of law and respect for judicial independence, impartiality and due process and ensure freedom from torture. Ghana made a recommendation. 75. Hungary noted the accession to, and ratification of, various international human rights instruments. It was concerned that the electronic media remained under government control and shared the concerns of the Special Rapporteur about electoral irregularities. Hungary made recommendations. 76. India hoped that Cambodia would continue to improve judicial impartiality to strengthen the rule of law. It commended the early achievement of the five MDGs and the measures taken to provide access to health care, education and social justice. India made recommendations. 77. Thailand welcomed the contribution of Cambodia to the human rights mechanisms of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), its cooperation with the Special Rapporteur and the accession to CRPD. It recognized efforts to address land disputes and promote education and health care. Thailand made recommendations. 78. The Islamic Republic of Iran recognized the magnitude of the efforts made and the commitment of Cambodia to the promotion and protection of human rights, including the ratification of CRPD. It made recommendations.  79. Iraq commended measures taken on behalf of poor households and vulnerable groups, judicial reforms aimed at incorporating international norms, the promotion of freedom of expression, action against corruption and the ratification of CPED. Iraq made recommendations. 80. Ireland urged Cambodia to ensure respect for the right of peaceful assembly and reiterated the Special Rapporteur’s call for legal clarification of the government ban. It was concerned about continued government mistreatment of human rights defenders, its near monopoly of the media and restrictions on freedom of expression. Ireland made recommendations. 81. Italy welcomed the progress in protecting and promoting human rights, including steps to reduce domestic violence and raise awareness of CEDAW. It asked what further measures would be adopted to combat corruption and promote transparency, accountability, non-discrimination and meaningful participation. Italy made recommendations. 82. Japan welcomed the policy of suspending the granting of new economic land concessions. It commended the accession to CPED and CRPD. Japan made recommendations. 83. Kenya welcomed the ratification of CRPD and CPED. It also welcomed the assistance provided by OHCHR in the areas of prison reform, fundamental freedoms, land and housing rights, the rule of law and the Extraordinary Chambers. Kenya made recommendations.  84. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic noted that Cambodia had achieved most MDG targets and recorded a rapid improvement in social indicators. It encouraged Cambodia to strengthen its cooperation with the United Nations and other international organizations and stakeholders. 85. Latvia welcomed the ratification of several human rights treaties and noted with appreciation that Cambodia was a party to the Rome Statute. Latvia made recommendations. 86. Malaysia commended the ratification of CRPD, legal reforms, anti-corruption measures and achievements in the area of education. It welcomed the progress made in the empowerment of women and in combating human trafficking. Malaysia made recommendations. 87. Mauritania noted the importance attached to strengthening the institutional and legal framework required for the promotion of human rights. It commended the ratification of CRPD, CPED and the Optional Protocol to CEDAW 88. Argentina commended ratification of CPED and encouraged Cambodia to ratify other human rights treaties. Argentina made recommendations. 89. Montenegro welcomed the adoption of the Criminal Code, the Law on Implementation of the Civil Code and the Anti-corruption Law. It asked whether Cambodia had amended the didactic code to delete any reference to the inferior role of women in society and enquired about implementation of the action plan to eliminate the worst forms of child labour. Montenegro made recommendations. 90. Referring to the cooperation of Cambodia with international human rights mechanisms, the delegation indicated that under the chairmanship of Cambodia, ASEAN had adopted the ASEAN Human Rights Declaration in December 2012. The delegation highlighted the great efforts made by Cambodia, including in Geneva, to avail itself of OHCHR technical assistance and guidance and noted the positive cooperation with the Special Rapporteur, as illustrated by his most recent visit in January 2014. The delegation emphasized that the Government would continue with the positive cooperation. 91. Responding again to questions raised on the suppression of recent demonstrations, the delegation stated that, while it appreciated the importance of freedom of expression, it believed that such a right must be exercised within the framework of national and international laws without infringing on the rights of others, such as the right to security and to property. 92. Turning to freedom of expression on the Internet, the delegation noted that no restrictions had been put in place to date and that in drafting the cyber law, the Government would respect the recommendations received and follow the relevant United Nations standards. 93. On the prospects for the establishment of a national human rights institution in line with the Paris Principles, the delegation noted that the Government would take this process forward on the basis of the recommendations made by the Special Rapporteur and the Prime Minister and in consultation with civil society organizations.  94. Responding to questions about reports of harassment and intimidation against human rights defenders, the delegation emphasized that Cambodia had made great efforts to work with civil society, including human rights defenders, and that the Cambodia Human Rights Committee had fully cooperated with OHCHR and civil society organizations.  95. Regarding child labour, the delegation mentioned that the Ministry of Social Affairs and the Ministry of Labour had municipal/provincial offices that worked to identify cases of child labour. The delegation noted, however, that such cases were not always straightforward, given that, owing to poverty, parents often did not wish their children to be taken out of factories.  96. On the current ban on demonstrations and public assembly, the delegation added that the ban was introduced temporarily until the situation had improved and that it applied to public assembly. In this regard, the delegation indicated that the Government was also drafting a law on access to information. 97. Morocco welcomed the willingness of Cambodia to undertake electoral reforms. It commended the mechanism to protect the rights of persons deprived of their liberty, especially the right not to be subjected to torture or ill-treatment. Morocco made recommendations. 98. Myanmar noted with appreciation that Cambodia had achieved five of the MDGs. It welcomed efforts to establish a national human rights institution and the implementation of the national plan, “Education for All”. Myanmar made recommendations. 99. Nepal appreciated the priority given to education, health services and employment and welcomed measures to prohibit discrimination against women. It appreciated the constructive engagement of Cambodia with the Special Rapporteur. Nepal made recommendations.  100. The Netherlands welcomed the importance attached to freedom of expression and information and freedom of the press and publications. It was concerned about violations of the freedom of assembly and association that had affected trade unions and civil society organizations. It made recommendations. 101. New Zealand expressed concern about allegations of fraud, irregularities and violence prior to the elections in 2013 and was concerned about challenges faced by human rights defenders, journalists and labour organizers. It made recommendations. 102. Nicaragua welcomed the ratification of international treaties, the enactment of domestic laws and the adoption of educational, health and housing programmes. It encouraged Cambodia to incorporate the UPR recommendations into its action plan to eliminate the worst forms of child labour. Nicaragua made recommendations. 103. Pakistan commended the ratification of international treaties, the creation of human rights protection mechanisms and the establishment of direct contacts between the Ministry of Women’s Affairs and corresponding provincial and municipal departments. Pakistan made recommendations. 104. Poland encouraged Cambodia to comply with the recently ratified international human rights treaties. It was concerned about the situation in the justice sector and about the excessive use of force during election-related demonstrations and strikes by workers in the garment sector. Poland made recommendations.  105. Portugal welcomed the creation of the National Council for Children and its regional network. It made recommendations. 106. The Republic of Korea encouraged Cambodia to strengthen its policies to meet people’s expectations for enhanced freedom and rights. It regretted the loss of life occasioned by the violent measures taken by the security forces against protesters in the garment sector. It made recommendations. 107. Romania noted that Cambodia continued to face serious challenges. It made a recommendation. 108. The Russian Federation noted the efforts made to combat poverty, to achieve sustainable development and to ensure enhanced access to health care and education. It made recommendations. 109. Senegal commended the adoption of national action plans to improve the living conditions of children, women and persons with disabilities. It welcomed measures to combat impunity, especially the establishment of the Extraordinary Chambers. Senegal made recommendations. 110. Serbia noted that steps were being taken to establish an independent national human rights institution, to strengthen the independence of judges and prosecutors and to reform the prison system. Serbia made recommendations. 111. Australia expressed concern about restrictions on freedom of assembly and association, particularly the recent disproportionate violence against protesters, including detention without trial. Noting allegations of electoral irregularities in 2013, it welcomed the stated commitment to undertake electoral reforms. Australia made recommendations.  112. Slovakia encouraged Cambodia to ratify additional human rights treaties. Referring to reports of intimidation and threats against human rights defenders, it invited Cambodia to engage in a meaningful dialogue with them and to ensure their protection. It urged Cambodia to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur, other special procedures mandate holders and OHCHR. Slovakia made recommendations.  113. On the reports of irregularities in relation to the election in July 2013, the delegation cited the example of the indelible ink and stated that the ink was so effective that it had remained on voters’ fingers for a month after the elections. The delegation also discredited the reports of irregularities concerning voter registration and the allegation that the election was not conducted transparently, emphasizing that effective measures were in place to address discrepancies or problems. 114. On the efforts to combat corruption, the delegation referred to the Anti-Corruption Law, which was adopted in 2010 in line with the relevant international conventions, and the existence of the National Anti-Corruption Council and the national anti-corruption unit. The delegation noted that great efforts were being made to disseminate and enforce the Anti-Corruption Law and many offenders had been prosecuted.  115. On the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia, the delegation affirmed that Cambodia strictly followed the internal rules of the Chambers and never interfered with its work. National auditors were in place to monitor and prevent corruption within the institution. The delegation also added that in the past year, Cambodia had paid $1.7 million for utilities for the Chambers, including electricity and transport, and $1.8 million for the salaries of the national staff. 116. On land issues, the delegation explained that the land law and other relevant regulations, as well as the necessary mechanisms for implementation, were in place to protect the rights of the people. Once the land was titled, it was for the courts to settle disputes. Individuals who lived on State-owned land were usually provided with two options, either to accept a proposed development project on the same spot, or be relocated. For those who lived on private land, the Government facilitated a mutually acceptable solution with the private companies concerned.  117. In conclusion, the delegation thanked its interlocutors for all the recommendations received. Noting that those recommendations would be prioritized, with indications of a timeline, the delegation stated that Cambodia would draft a human rights action plan on the basis of the recommendations. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 118. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue and listed below enjoy the support of Cambodia: 118.1 Ratify the first Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and sign and ratify the second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (France); 118.2 Ratify Optional Protocols 1 and 2 to ICCPR (Austria); 118.3 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Hungary); 118.4 Continue exploring possibilities to extend its international commitments by ratifying the Optional Protocols to ICCPR (Latvia); 118.5 Ensure the realization of the right to education to all children in Cambodia, including to the children of Vietnamese origin, and sign and ratify the Optional Protocols to ICESCR and to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Portugal); 118.6 Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrants Workers and Members of their Families (Ecuador); 118.7 Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families that it signed in 2004 (Egypt); 118.8 Take the necessary steps to ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Ghana); 118.9 Ratify the UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education (Brazil); 118.10 Ratify the UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education (Chad); 118.11 Take steps to ratify the UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education (Austria); 118.12 Continue the process of accession to the core human rights instruments (Azerbaijan); 118.13 Adopt effective measures to combat the culture of violence and impunity and to establish an independent and adequately resourced national preventive mechanism according to OP-CAT requirements (Germany); 118.14 Ensure the full implementation of the recently adopted regulations referring to the Criminal Code (Montenegro); 118.15 Review the penal code to ensure it aligns with Cambodia’s obligations under the International Convention on Civil and Political Rights pertaining to freedom of expression and take the necessary actions to amend or repeal any articles which do not meet these obligations (Canada); 118.16 Revise the Penal Code in order to bring it into line with international standards and Cambodia’s obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Belgium); 118.17 Establish a law on freedom of information in accordance with international standards (Belgium); 118.18 Adopt legislative and other measures that promote the enjoyment of freedom of expression (Botswana); 118.19 Take action to ensure that Cambodian legislation enables all political parties, labour unions and other civil society groups to exercise their rights to freedom of expression, association and peaceful assembly; and that peaceful demonstrations can occur safely and without fear of intimidation or excessive use of force on the part of the Cambodian authorities (Canada); 118.20 Revise the Penal Code as well as other laws so that they comply with international freedom of expression standards and prevent the harassment of human rights defenders, journalists and NGOs (Czech Republic); 118.21 Take steps to bring Cambodia’s laws and practices into line with existing international human rights standards in relation to freedom of expression, including press freedom (Ireland); 118.22 Protect free and independent media, namely through the revocation of article 305 of the Penal Code and article 13 of the Press Law (Portugal); 118.23 Take the necessary steps to strengthen the legal framework surrounding elections so as to ensure that future elections are free and fair, thereby allowing Cambodian citizens to have a say in the decisions that affect their lives and to elect the officials who reflect and respond effectively to their needs (Canada); 118.24 Implement the three draft laws aimed at promoting the independence and efficiency of the judiciary system once adopted (Portugal); 118.25 Implement and strengthen policies and laws to protect and promote the rights of persons with disabilities and ensure that these mechanisms enjoy a human rights based approach consistent with the CRPD and in consultation with civil society (Colombia); 118.26 Adopt and implement laws that prohibit all forms of ill-treatment of children and that protect them from forced labour, sexual exploitation and abuse (Portugal); 118.27 Give continuity to legislative and institutional reforms for the promotion and protection of human rights (Nepal); 118.28 Continue strengthening its national institutional capacity in promoting and protecting human rights, including through completing the process of establishment of a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Indonesia); 118.29 Rapidly create a national human rights institution in conformity with Paris Principles (Tunisia); 118.30 Establish an independent institution in charge of human rights in accordance with the Paris Principles (Algeria); 118.31 Finalize the establishment of a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Egypt); 118.32 Consider the establishment of a national human rights institution in line with the Paris Principles (India); 118.33 Establish an independent national human rights institution (Thailand); 118.34 Increase efforts to establish a national human rights institution in compliance with the Paris Principles (Chile); 118.35 Continue the positive steps it has undertaken to establish a national human rights institution based on the Paris Principles (Malaysia); 118.36 Establish a national institution for the promotion and protection of human rights in conformity with the Paris Principles (Morocco); 118.37 Continue with its efforts for the establishment of an independent national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Pakistan); 118.38 Establish an independent national human rights institution, consistent with the Paris Principles (Australia); 118.39 Work on strengthening international cooperation in the field of human rights (Turkmenistan); 118.40 Strengthen human rights cooperation and constructive dialogue, including those through the ASEAN Human Rights Commission and with the relevant United Nations human rights bodies and mechanisms (Viet Nam); 118.41 Seek the support of the international community in the framework of technical and financial assistance in order to strengthen its capacities for the timely implementation of activities relating to human rights (Angola); 118.42 Continue its efforts for human rights education and training at all levels including for government functionaries (Pakistan); 118.43 Support family-oriented approaches for the protection of the rights of the child and implement the already existing national policy in this regard (Serbia); 118.44 Consider further cooperation with the international human rights monitoring mechanisms, including the treaty bodies and special procedures of the Human Rights Council (Turkmenistan); 118.45 Continue cooperation with the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Cambodia and implement his recommendations (Austria); 118.46 Strive to maintain a constructive working relationship with the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Cambodia in respect of his independence and that of OHCHR (Belgium); 118.47 Cooperate fully with the office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in Cambodia and accept the visit requests by the special rapporteurs (Switzerland); 118.48 Further enhance its cooperation with OHCHR and the mechanisms of the Human Rights Council (Kenya); 118.49 Make further efforts to raise awareness on gender equality and to combat discrimination against women (Slovenia); 118.50 Implement all measures, including national awareness-raising campaigns, and efforts aimed at amending or eliminating patriarchal attitudes and stereotypes discriminating against women, including those based on the Chbab Srey (Uruguay); 118.51 Continue its progress in promoting and protecting women’s rights with the consolidation of the institutional mechanisms and the implementation of laws which are being positively promoted (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 118.52 Continue efforts on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women (Algeria); 118.53 Promote a gender equality law regarding the rights to property, inheritance and marriage (Mexico); 118.54 Continue its measures on awareness-raising campaigns and other necessary measures with regard to the promotion of equity in the society and the elimination of discrimination against women (Azerbaijan); 118.55 Continue empowering women, children and underprivileged sections of society (Nepal); 118.56 Continue its efforts for the elimination of discrimination against women (Pakistan); 118.57 Continue to combat discrimination suffered by the children of marginalized and vulnerable groups and eradicate gender-based stereotypes. Along these lines, ensure the continuation of the Strategic Education Plan 2009–2013, to offer the same opportunities to all children and youth regardless of race, colour, sex, language, belief, religion, political beliefs, circumstances of birth and social conditions (Colombia); 118.58 Create conditions favourable to inter-ethnic tolerance in Cambodia for the democratic future of the country (Switzerland); 118.59 Continue with measures to guarantee the birth registration of children, with no discrimination against migrant children, and continue strengthening the legal framework for the procedures of acquisition of nationality (Argentina); 118.60 Consider taking the necessary measures to further improve prison conditions (India); 118.61 Take measures to avoid the use of excessive force and ensure that conditions of arrest and pretrial detention meet international standards (Belgium); 118.62 Take all the measures to prevent and combat violence and sexual abuse against women and children, including rape, by promoting an effective mechanism to receive and investigate complaints of sexual violence and offering the victims psychological and medical assistance (Uruguay);  118.63 Deploy further efforts in order to prevent and punish violence, including rape, against women and children and pay special attention to the most vulnerable families living in a poor environment (Italy); 118.64 Increase the awareness-raising campaign on the rights of women and children, involving journalists and media professionals as one of its focus groups (Italy); 118.65 Reform national legislation with the aim of improving the protection of children and women from violence and above all domestic violence (Russian Federation); 118.66 Take the necessary measures to ensure that children and minors in rehabilitation centres and youth centres are not in any way submitted to torture or ill-treatment, in conformity with the provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Belgium); 118.67 Continue its efforts in promoting and protecting the rights of the child, including finalizing and implementing the new draft of a national plan to eliminate the worst forms of child labour for the period 2013–2018 (Indonesia); 118.68 Ensure full compliance with the laws on child labour and implement its national plan of action on the elimination of the worst forms of child labour; strengthen the legislation prohibiting child labour with priority for the situation of children in domestic work; increase the number of labour inspections; and ensure that fines and criminal sanctions against persons who use illegal child labour are imposed (Uruguay); 118.69 Strengthen the measures to combat child labour and the exploitation of children (Algeria); 118.70 Continue government efforts to eradicate the worst forms of child labour and to improve safety standards at work (Cuba); 118.71 Implement the plan of action to eliminate the worst forms of child labour (Iraq); 118.72 Combat the issues of rape and prostitution of minors by ensuring the full implementation of the laws criminalizing sexual abuse and exploitation (Belgium); 118.73 Design an adequate mechanism for assisting street children so that they can benefit from aid and reintegration services (Djibouti); 118.74 Improve its efforts on child protection systems, particularly children belonging to marginalized and disadvantaged groups (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 118.75 Continue efforts to combat trafficking in persons (Uzbekistan); 118.76 Redouble efforts to combat trafficking in persons, especially women and children (Ecuador); 118.77 Continue to take the necessary measures for effectively fighting human trafficking and child labour (Germany); 118.78 Continue making efforts to combat trafficking in persons, in particular children (Nicaragua); 118.79 Fully implement the framework for the reform of the justice system established in the September 2010 report by the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Cambodia (Spain); 118.80 Ensure that endeavours concerning legal reforms continue unhindered (Sweden); 118.81 Step up efforts aimed at strengthening the independence of both of the judiciary and the media (Italy); 118.82 Take all necessary measures to guarantee the independence of justice without control or political interference (Switzerland); 118.83 Establish a judicial reform which provides, inter alia, mechanisms to guarantee an independent justice and the effectiveness of the bodies responsible for combating corruption (Belgium); 118.84 Continue with the judicial reform process, including the implementation of measures to strengthen institutions and guarantee their independence (Chile); 118.85 Take measures which promote the independence of the judiciary in law and practice (Botswana); 118.86 Further strengthen its judicial institutions and the national human rights institution, in order to guarantee their effective independence (Kenya); 118.87 Undertake relevant reforms that guarantee the independence and impartiality of the judiciary and ensure that it is free from political control and interference (Poland); 118.88 Adopt and apply the laws on the status of judges and prosecutors, on the judicial organization and functioning of tribunals and on the High Council of the Judiciary to guarantee the independence of the judiciary system (France); 118.89 Adopt all necessary measures to ensure the independence of justice, including by means of effective implementation of the judicial reform (Slovakia); 118.90 Accelerate its judicial reform process to strengthen and guarantee the independence of the judiciary and to address corruption issues within the judiciary system by adopting relevant laws of reform (Republic of Korea); 118.91 Continue its efforts to enhance the rule of law as enshrined in its Constitution (Singapore); 118.92 Continue with measures to strengthen independent and impartial investigations into human rights abuses (Argentina); 118.93 Put in place a juvenile justice system adapted to the needs of juvenile delinquents, particularly so that minors are not detained with adults (Djibouti); 118.94 Adopt the necessary measures to guarantee access to justice for women (Spain); 118.95 Strengthen the means at the disposal of the justice system and make it more accessible to indigent persons (Senegal); 118.96 Strengthen the law enforcement authorities (Iraq); 118.97 Make further efforts, including in a financial sense, to ensure the smooth implementation and successful conclusion of the Khmer Rouge Tribunal, in cooperation with the international community (Japan); 118.98 Ensure, as a matter of urgency, that the national portion of the budget for the Extraordinary Courts is met (New Zealand); 118.99 Pursue the measures which have been taken on judicial reform to support the activity of the Extraordinary Chambers and continue cooperation with the Special Rapporteur (Romania); 118.100 Provide, in accordance with its obligations under international human rights law, effective protection for the family as the fundamental and natural unit of society (Egypt); 118.101 In line with its commitment under the previous UPR cycle, work towards ensuring free access to the electronic media and liberalize the electronic media ownership rules by drafting a cyber law in accordance with international standards (Hungary); 118.102 Ensure that the concept of defamation and disturbance of public order is in line with the human right to freedom of expression in law and practice (Germany); 118.103 Approach the issue of regulating freedom of expression on the Internet through consultations with all stakeholders (Sweden); 118.104 Promote a safe and favourable environment that allows individuals and groups to exercise the freedoms of expression, association and peaceful assembly and put an end to harassment, intimidation, arbitrary arrests and physical attacks, particularly in the context of peaceful demonstrations (Switzerland); 118.105 Respect and protect the rights of human rights defenders and journalists to conduct their work without hindrance, intimidation or harassment (Austria); 118.106 Ensure the right of individuals and organizations to defend and promote human rights, including protection and promotion of the rights of freedom of expression, assembly and association (Colombia); 118.107 Ensure the protection of workers exercising the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and association and enable the full implementation of the right to freedom of expression in the country (Croatia); 118.108 Actively protect the rights to freedom of expression and to peaceful assembly by ensuring that any restriction on those rights is lawful, necessary and proportionate (New Zealand); 118.09 Adopt and implement effective measures in order to prevent the use of violence against demonstrators, in accordance with the Law on Peaceful Assembly, and enable all groups, including those expressing dissenting views, to have their rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and association fully restored (Czech Republic); 118.110 Ensure freedom of assembly and association and recognize the importance of trade unions and a diverse civil society in a democracy (Netherlands); 118.111 Ensure full respect, in law and in practice, for the freedom of peaceful assembly and of association, consistent with international law (Australia); 118.112 Ensure that the rights of human rights defenders are respected, in line with the recommendations accepted by Cambodia during the first UPR cycle (Belgium); 118.113 Adopt the necessary measures to respect and protect human rights defenders (Chile); 118.114 Take all necessary measures for the protection of human rights defenders, particularly by prosecuting the perpetrators of violence against, or intimidation of, them (France); 118.115 Protect the rights of human rights defenders (Germany); 118.116 Ensure that the right of human rights defenders to conduct their work without hindrance, intimidation or harassment is respected and protected, as recommended in the previous cycle and accepted by Cambodia (Ireland); 118.117 Address the electoral shortcomings raised by numerous actors, including the Special Rapporteur on Cambodia and the European Union technical assistance mission (Sweden); 118.118 By the end of 2014, adopt and implement the recommendations on electoral reform of the Special Rapporteur on Cambodia (United Kingdom); 118.119 Undertake key electoral reforms to: improve the integrity of the voter registration system and voter list; ensure that all candidates have equal access to the media; and ensure that the National Election Committee retains full independence (United States); 118.120 Ensure equal access of all candidates to the media, avoid manipulation of voters and foster a culture of dialogue amongst all political parties (Czech Republic); 118.121 The parties concerned should promote dialogue and cooperation, with regard to the outcome of the last year’s general elections, in order to swiftly normalize the situation and to realize election reform (Japan);  118.122 Implement electoral reform, as recommended by the Special Rapporteur on Cambodia, in order to prevent future recurrences of these issues (New Zealand); 118.123 Undertake electoral reforms to ensure credible electoral processes (Australia); 118.124 Step up the fight against false job offers and sign agreements with countries where Cambodian women are hired (Spain); 118.125 Strengthen its policies to improve labour standards for all workers and continue its efforts in reducing child labour (Spain); 118.126 Continue strengthening effective job creation programmes to combat poverty and social inequality (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 118.127 Promote legislation on corporate social responsibility and the dissemination of guiding principles on business and human rights with a view to improving safety in the work place and working conditions for employees (Mexico); 118.128 Strengthen efforts to reduce poverty in rural areas and bridge the wealth gap between rural and urban areas (Sri Lanka); 118.129 Cease forced dispossession and guarantee just and transparent process when it comes to land tenure (Mexico); 118.130 Implement a strict legislative framework which ensures that evictions and relocations are legal, negotiated and fairly compensated (Austria); 118.131 Continue efforts in land matters, including through the effective and transparent implementation of measures of land allocation (France); 118.132 Ensure that the granting of land concessions or the withdrawal of land titles or the legal rights to land use does not lead to violations of human rights (Germany); 118.133 Continue to make progress on important issues for the promotion of human rights and its democratization, particularly in judicial reform and measures to address land issues (Japan); 118.134 Continue the reform of the land tenure system to meet the national objectives of poverty reduction, food security and environmental protection (Morocco); 118.135 Increase measures to tackle illegal land evictions, including those against indigenous people, and consider fortifying the legislative framework consistently with international standards (Italy); 118.136 Intensify its efforts to achieve the national goals for poverty reduction, food security and socioeconomic development, including through land management reforms (Malaysia); 118.137 Continue taking measures to protect social rights, including the rights of children, women and persons with disabilities (Uzbekistan); 118.138 Intensify its efforts to reduce rural-urban income inequalities with support from the international community and other relevant United Nations agencies (Bhutan); 118.139 Continue its efforts to maintain social stability and to promote economic development, and make a good effort to develop people’s lives and improve it (China); 118.140 Continue to take measures ensuring poverty eradication and access to health and education services (Cuba); 118.141 Continue reducing the poverty rate in rural areas and the wealth gap between rich and poor and between the urban and rural populations (Myanmar); 118.142 Reduce the gap between urban and rural areas through poverty reduction in rural areas (Iraq); 118.143 Implement, in cooperation with the international community, effective programmes aimed at reducing poverty, especially in the rural areas of the country (Azerbaijan); 118.144 Continue its work on meeting its objectives in the field of development as set out in the Millennium Declaration (Russian Federation); 118.145 Continue to increase its efforts to ensure the enjoyment of socioeconomic rights by citizens (Russian Federation); 118.146 Strengthen and improve social safety networks (Iraq); 118.147 Further support the development of the health sector, paying special attention to rural areas where availability, accessibility, quality and use of health services remain limited, in an effort to further promote and protect the human rights of its people (State of Palestine); 118.148 Increase its ongoing efforts aimed at promoting equitable health rights for all Cambodian people (Timor-Leste); 118.149 Further develop national programmes with a focus on providing access to health services to people living under the poverty line (Timor-Leste); 118.150 Provide free treatment to women and men living with HIV/AIDS to prevent mother-child transmission (Uruguay); 118.151 Step up information on sexual and reproductive health, including modern contraceptive methods, in particular for women living in rural areas (Uruguay); 118.152 Continue its efforts in achieving the MDGs, in particular in the area of the health of its population (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 118.153 Continue to adopt effective social policy regarding access to education and health services, in particular for women and children (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 118.154 Further improve the quality of its health services through the implementation of its National Health Strategic Plan (Brunei Darussalam); 118.155 Continue to pay attention to the right to health of the child, elderly people, the poor and other vulnerable groups (China); 118.156 Continue to promote sustainable development of the health sector, prioritizing the partnership with the national community in delivering health services to all citizens (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 118.157 Pursue, even consolidate policies and programmes facilitating access to health-care services for vulnerable persons (Senegal); 118.158 Boost activities and strategies aimed at achieving all Millennium Development Goals, especially those related to the rights to education and health care and the rights of vulnerable groups (Viet Nam); 118.159 Further increase its national spending on the health and education sector to meet the targets of the MDGs (Azerbaijan); 118.160 Promote access to free education and health-care services, especially in rural areas, including through enhanced cooperation with neighbouring countries and development partners (Thailand); 118.161 Ensure that basic education is compulsory and step up its efforts to address the issue of high drop-out rates in schools and in promoting the right of girls to education (Slovenia); 118.162 Continue efforts to achieve universal primary education in line with the vision of the National Plan of “Education for All” (Sri Lanka); 118.163 Continue implementing measures aimed at improving the coverage and quality of education services, particularly in remote areas (State of Palestine); 118.164 In cooperation with UNDP and UNESCO, continue to improve its education system and vocational training for its people (Singapore); 118.165 Continue to promote free-of-charge school enrolment (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 118.166 Continue its efforts to transform its progress on the level of macroeconomic indicators into enhanced measures of social justice and elevated degrees of human development, particularly by ensuring universal, compulsory and free basic education (Egypt); 118.167 Continue working on its National Plan “Education for All” so that all Cambodian children and youth further enjoy an equitable education service (Myanmar); 118.168 Continue to promote programmes for access to education for all, in particular in primary education (Nicaragua); 118.169 Continue to protect and promote the rights of persons with disabilities (Djibouti); 118.170 Intensify its endeavours to implement effectively the Law on the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 118.171 Continue its efforts on health, the social service system and education in order to help the vulnerable and disabled, particularly women and children (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 119. The following recommendations will be examined by Cambodia which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-sixth session of the Human Rights Council in June 2014: 119.1 Make the necessary declarations under article 41 of ICCPR (Austria); 119.2 Make the necessary declarations under articles 21 and 22 of CAT (Austria);  119.3 Consider acceding to the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the International Criminal Court (Croatia); 119.4 Accede to the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the Court (Slovakia); 119.5 Sign and ratify the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the Court (France); 119.6 Rapidly complete the process of aligning its national law with the provisions of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Tunisia); 119.7 Take appropriate steps to fully align national legislation with all obligations under the Rome Statute, including by adopting specific provisions aimed at thorough and expeditious cooperation with the Court (Croatia); 119.8 Review its national legislation by enacting specific provisions to cooperate promptly and fully with the International Criminal Court (Latvia); 119.9 Establish an independent national preventive mechanism with the necessary mandate to fulfil its obligations under the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Denmark); 119.10 Appoint the national preventive mechanism under the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (Portugal); 119.11 Build on structures already in place and set up a national preventive mechanism in accordance with OP-CAT standards (Serbia); 119.12 Rapidly create a national preventive mechanism against torture (Tunisia); 119.13 Issue a standing invitation to special procedures mandate holders of the Human Rights Council (Tunisia); 119.14 Issue a standing invitation to the special procedures of the United Nations (France); 119.15 Extend a standing invitation to all thematic special procedures (Montenegro); 119.16 Strengthen its cooperation with the special procedures mandate holders by responding positively to the pending visit requests and eventually consider extending a standing invitation to all of them (Latvia); 119.17 Further strengthen its cooperation with the Special Rapporteur on Cambodia and consider inviting special procedures thematic mandate holders in order to benefit from their expertise (Poland); 119.18 Systematically consult with civil society and NGOs on the implementation of UPR, United Nations treaty bodies and United Nations special procedures’ recommendations (Austria); 119.19 Seek technical assistance from OHCHR and from the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression on possible ways to adjust the Press Law (Brazil);  119.20 Take measures to strengthen the independence and functioning of the country’s judiciary, in particular to substantively reduce the time spent by persons in pretrial detention (Austria); 119.21 Investigate impartially cases of use of excessive force against protesters and cases of killings during the recent demonstrations (Czech Republic); 119.22 Review all legal cases against individuals who are detained under criminal or judicial investigation on account of the exercise of their right to freedom of expression, as provided in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Denmark); 119.23 Ensure a favourable climate for the activities of human rights defenders, journalists and other civil society actors (Tunisia); 119.24 Protect opposition party members, journalists and human rights defenders from harassment and arbitrary arrest and lift all restrictions to peaceful demonstrations (Portugal); 119.25 Ensure independence of the media from political influence and liberalize media ownership rules (Czech Republic); 119.26 Develop an action plan ensuring that Internet laws comply with Cambodia’s commitment to guarantee freedom of expression and information, so as to ensure free access to electronic media, liberalize electronic media ownership rules and allow national bloggers, journalists, other Internet users and NGOs to play a full and active role in promoting and protecting human rights (Netherlands); 119.27 Repeal or amend relevant articles of the Penal Code, such as those regarding defamation or the discrediting of judicial decisions, which would bring Cambodia’s domestic legislation into line with its international human rights obligations on freedom of expression (United States); 119.28 Conduct an investigation into the facts of the recent incidents and prevent impunity for abuses committed (Spain); 119.29 Guarantee the effective exercise of the human right to assembly, in particular with respect to crowd control, formulate clear instructions compatible with human rights standards for the use of firearms, provide training for the police on conduct compatible with human rights, prohibit the use of violence by unofficial or plain clothes security forces and ensure all persons detained have timely access to their families and to legal counsel (Germany); 119.30 Continue applying the 2012 directive on land concessions (Spain); 119.31 In parallel with its ongoing work on land titling, undertake an urgent review of economic land concessions before the current moratorium on economic land concessions is lifted (United Kingdom); 119.32 Take steps to implement an official land titling programme with the meaningful participation of civil society to prioritize the settlement of land disputes with full respect for the rule of law (United States); 119.33 Develop and implement alternate strategies to assist those being displaced as a result of the taking of land and ensure that those persons have adequate housing and access to basic services, health care and employment (Republic of Korea); 119.34 Make education compulsory by law and take the necessary measures to combat corruption in the educational system (Hungary); 120. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex 
[English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of Cambodia was headed by H.E. Mr Mak Sambath, Vice Chair of the National Human Rights Committee of Cambodia and composed of the following members: • H.E. Mr Nhem	 Thavy, MP, Chairman of the Commission on Human Rights, 
Reception of Complain Investigation and National Assembly-Senate relation 
• H.E. Mr Ouk Vatnarith, Vice Chair of the National Human Rights Committee of 
Cambodia 
• H.E. Mr Pol Lin, Secretary of State, Ministry of Interior • H.E. Mr Ith Rady, Under Secretary of State, Ministry of Justice • H.E. Mr Ney Samol, Ambassador, Permanent Representative in Geneva • Mr Sok Pisey, Assistant • Mr Ke Sovann, Deputy Permanent Representative in Geneva • Mr IV Heang, Minister Counsellor • Mr Thay Bunthon, Counsellor • Mr Iem Kounthdy, Counsellor • Mr Soth Vanna; First Secretary • Mrs Chhoeung Solida, First Secretary • Mr Thouch Khemarin, Chief of International Affairs Bureau, ACU Cambodia. 