  United Nations  A/HRC/24/11     General Assembly   Distr.: General 28 June 2013  Original: English  Human Rights Council Twenty-fourth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   Canada Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–127 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–13 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  14–127 4  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  128–129 14  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  25 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review (UPR), established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its sixteenth session from 22 April to 3 May 2013. The review of Canada was held at the 9th meeting on 26 April 2013. The delegation of Canada was headed by H.E. Ms. Elissa Golberg, Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Canada to the United Nations at Geneva. At its 13th meeting held on 30 April 2013, the Working Group adopted the report on Canada. 2. On 14 January 2013, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Canada: Brazil, Ireland and the Philippines. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Canada:  (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/CAN/1);   (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/CAN/2 and Corr.1);  (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/CAN/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by the Czech Republic, Estonia, Liechtenstein, Mexico, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Slovenia, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Canada through the troika. These questions are available on the UPR extranet.  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The head of Canada’s delegation, Ms. Elissa Golberg, provided a general overview of human rights in Canada, and more detail on five significant areas: relationship with Aboriginal peoples; violence against women and children; Canada’s social protection framework; immigration and refugee protection; and national security and public safety. 6. Human rights are protected by constitutional and legislative measures, and advanced through policies and programmes. All levels of government cooperate to ensure protections are in place across the country. Where Canadians consider themselves to be subject to a rights violation, avenues for redress are well established and openly accessible. 7. She outlined some developments since the last universal periodic review, reporting that Canada ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) in 2010. 8. Efforts to strengthen the relationship between Aboriginal peoples and other Canadians are fundamental to reconciliation and to paving the way for the full participation of Aboriginal people in the social, economic and cultural prosperity of Canada. 9. Equality between men and women is central to Canada’s foreign and domestic policies. The rights of women and girls are firmly entrenched in Canada’s Constitution and Canada is committed to improving their lives, particularly ending all forms of violence against women. 10. Canada’s approach includes a combination of responses to prevent and reduce violence against women and children; provide health and social assistance to those affected by it; and hold the perpetrators accountable. Addressing violence against Aboriginal women and girls is an important priority and Canada continues to take concrete steps to address this complex issue. 11. Canada continues to strengthen its comprehensive social protection framework and advance social innovation so that all individuals and communities can reach their full potential. Addressing disparity focuses on providing individuals with the opportunity to achieve independence and find long-term solutions through appropriate employment, income, housing, education and health supports. 12. Canada`s generous system provides asylum to persons in need of international protection. Persons that obtain the status of refugees can become permanent residents and apply for Canadian citizenship. A network of assistance and religious organizations assists their integration. 13. Canada’s police, correctional services and institutions responsible for national security and public safety are firmly committed to ensuring safety with due respect for human rights. Oversight is available to ensure that public security activities are in line with national and international obligations, and redress is available for upheld complaints. Canada believes that public outreach awareness and the active participation of all its citizens on national security issues, are important.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 14. During the interactive dialogue, 82 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 15. Chad noted that the national report followed up on the recommendations accepted during the first universal periodic review and that it was concerted at the federal and provincial level as well as with civil society and indigenous peoples. Chad made a recommendation. 16. Chile congratulated the Canadian efforts to eliminate violence against women and the ratification of CRPD. Chile asked whether Canada would accept a visit requested by the Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples. Chile made recommendations. 17. China was concerned about prevailing racial discrimination and severe poverty among minorities. It noted the poor conditions of indigenous people in health, education and employment, violence against indigenous women and children, and the violations to land rights. China made recommendations. 18. The United States of America praised the National Action Plan to Combat Human Trafficking. It remained concerned about the levels of poverty, violence and discrimination that Aboriginal women and children face. It made recommendations. 19. Côte d’Ivoire recognized the efforts undertaken to address recommendations related to indigenous peoples, though there was still space for improvement. It noted Canada’s positive role in combating violence against women. Côte d’Ivoire made recommendations. 20. Cuba highlighted the measures taken in the areas of education, gender equality, persons with disabilities and the elderly. It noted that indigenous peoples continued to suffer disadvantages. It also mentioned the persistence of racism. Cuba made recommendations. 21. Spain commended Canada’s efforts since the last universal periodic review to improve the situation of indigenous peoples, including in the area of access to water and sanitation, though some needs still required to be covered. Spain made recommendations. 22. The Czech Republic encouraged Canada to widely publish the outcome of this universal periodic review and to regularly consult with civil society on its outcomes. It made a recommendation. 23. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea expressed concerns regarding violations of the rights to peaceful assembly and freedom of expression, torture, racial discrimination and xenophobia. It noted the overincarceration of Aborigines, Afro-Canadians and ethnic minorities. It made recommendations. 24. Djibouti noted the enhancement of the Canadian legal and institutional human rights framework since the first universal periodic review through the domestication of international instruments, and the implementation of international commitments through the ratification of treaties. Djibouti made recommendations. 25. Ecuador thanked the delegation for the presentation of the second national report of Canada. Ecuador made recommendations. 26. Egypt expressed concern about racial profiling by law-enforcement officials and racial discrimination in employment. It urged Canada to recommit to a national anti-racism strategy and to participate in events addressing implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action. Egypt made recommendations. 27. Estonia noted progress in several human rights areas. It encouraged full implementation of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP). Estonia believed that more could be done to eliminate all forms of violence against Aboriginal women and children. It made recommendations. 28. Finland asked how Canada was addressing the multiple discrimination faced by Aboriginal women and girls in all sectors of society, including education, employment and health services. Finland made recommendations. 29. Canada indicated that it was now seeking to arrange a visit by the Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples. 30. Canada recognized that historic wrongs have strained the relationship with Aboriginal peoples. Canada is committed to reconciliation and a renewed relationship. Progress is being made in settling land claims and supporting self-government. Canada believes that increased participation by Aboriginal people in the labour market can improve their socioeconomic conditions, particularly young people. A large number of economic development projects are being implemented in or near Aboriginal communities. 31. To tackle poverty, Canada has an income assistance programme to help meet the basic needs of over 160,000 First Nations recipients, primarily living on reserves. Economic development is key to improving the lives and self-sufficiency of Aboriginal people and communities. 32. Canada noted several legislative measures to better protect the most vulnerable Aboriginal people and to ensure that they do not face discrimination, including: the Gender Equity in Indian Registration Act; an amendment to the Canadian Human Rights Act to extend real human rights protection to all members of First Nations communities; and the proposed Family Homes on Reserves and Matrimonial Interests or Rights Act, which seeks to provide basic rights and protection to individuals on reserves regarding the family home and other matrimonial interests or rights. 33. Canada also referred to a proposed bill to ensure access to safe drinking water for First Nations, effective treatment of waste water and the protection of sources of water on First Nations lands. 34. Canada noted that improving outcomes for Aboriginal students is a shared responsibility of governments, communities, educators, families and children. The Government has worked on a number of tripartite agreements to support First Nations education reform. 35. Since Canada’s first universal periodic review, there have been a number of actions to protect communities and ensure the safety of women and girls. These include: the strengthening of criminal law responses and penalties for violent crimes; providing police, prosecutors and the courts with enhanced measures to more effectively manage the threat posed by individuals who are at very high risk of reoffending; legislative measures to raise the age of sexual consent from 14 to 16 years to protect all young people, and particularly girls, from sexual exploitation by adult predators. A further measure is acting to prevent and address trafficking in persons and related forms of exploitation. 36. Deeply concerned about the number of missing and murdered Aboriginal women and girls, Canada is taking concrete actions to achieve real and lasting change. Among other actions, in 2010 the Government announced measures and funding for a seven-point strategy, aimed at improving the response of the law enforcement and justice systems. 37. France recognized the international commitment of Canada in the area of human rights. France asked whether Canada contemplated undertaking measures in favour of its citizens condemned to death, regardless of where they had been convicted. France made recommendations. 38. Gabon encouraged Canada to continue reinforcing relations with Aboriginal peoples and to pursue initiatives to fight racial discrimination. Gabon made a recommendation. 39. Germany appreciated ratification of CRPD and the endorsement of UNDRIP and encouraged its implementation. Germany was concerned about reports of violence against indigenous women and encouraged the State party to strengthen its efforts. It made recommendations. 40. Guatemala saluted the 2012 action plan against trafficking in persons, including the establishment of the first integrated team of agents against trafficking. It also noted the police’s bias-free policy that bans racial profiling. Guatemala made a recommendation. 41. The Holy See congratulated Canada for its human rights trajectory. It welcomed the 2009 change in the immigration system to favour the integration of immigrants and facilitate their participation in economic and social life. The Holy See made recommendations. 42. Honduras noted efforts to improve the conditions of indigenous peoples. The official apology for the suffering caused by the transfer of Inuit families in the 1950s was an example. However, there were still issues to be resolved. Honduras made recommendations. 43. Hungary commended the ratification of CRPD. It referred to criticism by civil society of the implementation of the 2002 Anti-terrorism Act and Public Safety Act and the impending implementation of the Balanced Refugee Reform Act and asked about this legislation. Hungary made recommendations. 44. Iceland asked about Canada’s plans to develop a strategy to end violence against Aboriginal women and girls. It commended measures to strengthen legislation and programmes regarding prohibition of commercial sexual exploitation of children including law reform initiatives. Iceland made recommendations. 45. India referred to the Committee on the Rights of the Child’s concerns on disparities in access to services by all children and the lack of prevention of child sexual exploitation. It noted concerns about violence affecting indigenous women. It asked if, in relation to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination’s concerns about Bill-C4, the provisions of mandatory detention have been repealed or modified. India made recommendations. 46. Indonesia appreciated the various measures to strengthen the relationship with the Aboriginal people. It however, indicated that it shared the concern about the high rates of incarceration of and violence to Aboriginal people, in particular women and girls, as well as the alleged inadequate response of the authorities. Indonesia made recommendations. 47. The Islamic Republic of Iran referred to child sexual exploitation and trafficking, the right to food, discriminatory laws against indigenous peoples and minority groups, including Muslim Arab and African communities. It expressed concern at the refusal of Canada to criminalize and punish acts of racist violence. It made recommendations. 48. Ireland urged the implementation of Canada’s 2012 National Action Plan to Combat Human Trafficking and to pay attention to all human rights issues of Aboriginal peoples. It noted that educational, economic and social development issues represent a continuing challenge. It made recommendations. 49. Italy applauded Canada’s outstanding commitment to the promotion and protection of human rights and welcomed progress in the implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention No. 29. It asked if Canada upholds its opinion that a specific criminal offence of domestic violence does not have any added value; and whether Canada intends to ratify ILO Conventions Nos. 98 and 138. Italy made a recommendation. 50. Japan inquired about Canada’s assessment of violence against Aboriginal women, the realization of the right to health among Aboriginal peoples, measures meant to improve the situation, and challenges identified/steps taken to meet CRPD obligations. Japan made a recommendation. 51. Jordan commended Canada for advancing the agenda of human rights at national and international level and for its ongoing efforts to combat racial discrimination through a combination of legislative, policy and education awareness. Jordan made recommendations. 52. Malaysia noted challenges with regard to the national homelessness programme and the prevention of racially motivated acts against Muslim, indigenous and minority communities. Malaysia made recommendations. 53. Canada is committed to eliminating racism and addressing discrimination facing Canada’s diverse racial, ethnic, cultural and religious communities. Canada’s multicultural society is based on intercultural understanding, shared citizenship, engagement and inclusion. Canada has a strong legal and policy framework to combat racism and discrimination and it condemns racially and religiously motivated crimes and violence. 54. Racial profiling is not used or condoned in Canada. Public safety organizations are guided by very clear policies that speak out against discrimination or profiling. Training for officials is provided. They also perform community outreach and are committed to investigating and responding to any concerns or complaints that deal with racial profiling. 55. On poverty, homelessness and access to social services, Canada has adopted a collaborative approach to social protection. The provinces and territories have primary responsibility for delivering services. Canada, however, recognizes that certain vulnerable groups face barriers to employment. The Government, in cooperation with provinces and territories, has a broad range of supports in education, employment, health, housing and income support, to address these barriers. 56. In 2002, Quebec adopted a law to address poverty and social exclusion. Implementation is guided by multi-year action plans and advised by a standing Advisory Committee including representatives of civil society which works with the populations concerned. Twenty-five per cent of poverty-related funding has been directed to children. Achievements in Quebec include a decreasing rate of the overall population dependent on social welfare from 8.4 per cent in 2002 to 6.9 per cent in 2012, the increase in the minimum wage by 41 per cent since 2002 and the full indexation of social benefits. 57. Mexico praised the Canadian endorsement of UNDRIP. It considered that it was necessary to strengthen efforts to combat violence against indigenous women and domestic violence. Mexico made recommendations. 58. Montenegro praised ratification of the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, and CRPD. It asked about plans to advance the inclusion of children with disabilities into general educational institutions and regulations addressing racist violence. Montenegro made recommendations. 59. Morocco encouraged Canada to adopt further measures to protect the linguistic rights of minority groups and to combat discrimination in education. It welcomed programmes targeting indigenous peoples and noted measures taken to prevent the exploitation of migrant workers. Morocco made recommendations. 60. Namibia praised Canada’s social security policies, promotion of multiculturalism, integration of immigrants and social cohesion, but expressed concern for quality of life of Aboriginal peoples, First Nations, Metis and Inuit. Namibia made recommendations. 61. The Netherlands praised Canada’s detailed explanations of the human rights situation in Canada, its national legislation and foreign policy. It made recommendations. 62. New Zealand welcomed confirmation that addressing violence against Aboriginal women remains a priority. It asked about steps taken since the last universal periodic review to further the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (OPCAT). New Zealand made recommendations. 63. Nicaragua commended the 2011 joint action plan between the Government and First Nations. It encouraged Canada to pursue participation of indigenous peoples in the social and economic life of the country. Nicaragua made a recommendation. 64. Norway acknowledged Canada’s efforts towards human rights since its last UPR. It noted high levels of violence against Aboriginal women and commended the appointment of a parliamentary committee to investigate the issue. Norway made recommendations. 65. Pakistan raised the issues of racial discrimination in earnings, lack of legislation criminalizing racist violence, need for criminal procedures for terrorism suspects, and the targeting of Muslim and Arab communities for harassment and profiling. Pakistan made recommendations. 66. Paraguay noted the progress achieved in the follow-up to the UPR first cycle’s recommendations, in particular in combating discrimination against indigenous peoples, violence against women and children, and measures in favour of the elderly and persons with disabilities. Paraguay made a recommendation. 67. Peru acknowledged the ratification of CRPD, the endorsement of UNDRIP and the adoption in 2012 of a plan to combat trafficking in persons. Peru made recommendations. 68. Portugal commended Canada for its commitment to human rights, values of freedom and democracy. It noted that some United Nations treaty bodies remained concerned that their recommendations were not being implemented. Portugal made recommendations. 69. Qatar commended Canada for improving the quality of education and health services and for its policies and legislation to protect human rights particularly the rights of persons with disabilities. It commended Canada’s establishment of a working group to provide job opportunities to persons with disabilities. 70. The Republic of Korea welcomed efforts to promote freedom of religion, including the creation of the Office of Religious Freedom, measures to fight human trafficking and measures to resolve questions related to Aboriginals. It made a recommendation. 71. The Republic of Moldova noted the efforts to combat trafficking in persons and sexual exploitation of children, including the adoption in 2012 of a national plan against trafficking and the Manitoba Strategy Responding to Children and Youth at Risk of, or Survivors of, Sexual Exploitation. It made recommendations. 72. Romania commended Canada for its consultations with civil society and expressed appreciation for the presentation of the national report. Romania made recommendations. 73. Canada is still considering OPCAT adherence, providing information on oversight of conditions in places of detention, allowing for access to recourse by independent panels and through the courts. 74. On peaceful assembly and policing, Canada noted that it respects the freedom to protest, with an expectation that participants will do so peacefully and with respect. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police routinely reaches out to organizers before an event. When de-escalation is not successful, the force used to manage a situation is always the lowest possible. When balance is not attained in this regard, Canada has independent review processes. 75. On incarceration, Canada acknowledged that Aboriginal Canadians continue to be overrepresented as victims, offenders and inmates. Courts consider alternatives to imprisonment of Aboriginal offenders, consistent with considerations of public safety. Examples include community-based approaches to justice, sentencing alternatives, and family and civil mediation services. 76. Correctional services and institutions across the country have specific policies and programmes to address the specific needs of ethno-cultural minority offenders. 77. On torture, Canada underscored that its obligations under article 3 are incorporated into Canadian law. Non-Canadians facing risks can also be seen as persons in need of protection and can apply to stay in Canada, and can stay their return to their country of origin if they are deemed to face serious risks following their removal. 78. Canada has a generous refugee system that provides a safe haven for those in need of protection, and a network of services to facilitate their integration. Some new developments have increased Canada’s ability to provide protection quickly to those in need: (a) accelerating timelines for determining an asylum claim to provide protection faster to those in need; and (b) designating countries of origin for priority processing. Canada reported that it had established a new refugee appeal division for eligible claims. 79. In conformity with the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, all asylum claimants receive a fair hearing to assess their claim on the basis of its merits before an independent semi-judicial tribunal (Immigration and Refugee Board), regardless of how or from where they arrived, exceeding the requirement of the Convention. Under this system, asylum claimants can have a representative with them throughout the process. Canada has recently announced funding to renew its support for legal aid. 80. Canada has not ratified the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families but fully supports its aims. Canada takes the promotion and protection of the human and labour rights of migrants seriously. Temporary foreign workers receive legal protection, including with respect to labour laws, in accordance with provincial, territorial and federal regimes. 81. The Russian Federation raised concerns about arbitrary detention and police ill-treatment, funding cuts to women’s rights organizations and lack of a homelessness and poverty strategy. It asked Canada to clarify the situation of a detained woman. It made recommendations. 82. Senegal commended the positive developments occurred since the first universal periodic review, notably those in favour of indigenous peoples, the elderly and persons with disabilities. It also praised the actions to combat violence against women and children. Senegal made recommendations. 83. Sierra Leone noted that Canada had widely disseminated the outcome of the first universal periodic review. It also addressed issues raised then, such as the rights of indigenous peoples and the protection of women and children from trafficking. Sierra Leone made recommendations. 84. Slovakia welcomed, inter alia, the ratification of CRPD in 2010. It appreciated the regular contributions made by Canada to the OHCHR budget, including to the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture. It made recommendations. 85. Slovenia welcomed efforts to address violence against women, but noted special rapporteur and treaty body reports of continuing widespread violence against indigenous women. Slovenia made a recommendation. 86. Cyprus praised Canada’s commitment to human rights and encouraged Canada to continue working with civil society, Aboriginal peoples and the private sector. It was encouraged by Canada’s pledge to combat all forms of violence against women. Cyprus made a recommendation. 87. Sri Lanka welcomed efforts to promote social inclusion, intercultural understanding and equality. It remained concerned over unequal treatment of people of colour, including Asian-Canadian and African-Canadian communities. It noted problems faced by immigrant skilled workers in finding suitable employment on par with their qualifications. Sri Lanka made recommendations. 88. The Sudan referred to Canada’s treatment of special procedures mandate holders. It noted that some officials had stated that United Nations experts and UPR should not examine the human rights record of Canada and should focus on other countries which face more serious and flagrant problems. The Sudan made recommendations. 89. Sweden appreciated efforts to fight violence against women but noted reports on violence against indigenous women. It referred to criticisms of Canada’s refugee legislation and asked about measures being taken to ensure that the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees is respected. Sweden made a recommendation. 90. Switzerland recalled that Canada had not yet ratified OPCAT even though it had accepted all recommendations regarding this during the first universal periodic review. It asked about the perspectives of a prompt ratification. Switzerland made recommendations. 91. Thailand welcomed efforts to combat human trafficking. It remained concerned about reports of lack of prevention of child sexual exploitation, violence and disparities in access to services and quality of education for all children, especially to minority and marginalized groups. It made recommendations. 92. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia asked about measures undertaken to implement the recommendations of the Independent Expert on minority issues concerning the representation of minorities in political structures and institutions. It made a recommendation. 93. Togo noted that Canada had accepted 54 recommendations and had undertaken nine voluntary commitments. It highlighted the polyvalent approach followed by Canada in favour of indigenous peoples. However, discrimination and violence against women and children persisted. Togo made recommendations. 94. Trinidad and Tobago referred to the human rights framework supported by the independent courts system and complementary laws, policies and programmes. It made recommendations. 95. Tunisia encouraged Canada to continue strengthening its legal framework through ratification of other international instruments and the implementation of treaty body recommendations. Tunisia made recommendations. 96. Turkey referred to Canada’s support system, not only for refugees and the oppressed, but also for professionals, innovators and investors. It noted however, negative reports in the implementation of the rights of migrants, refugees, persons with disabilities, women and Aboriginal peoples. Turkey made recommendations. 97. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland encouraged Canada to sign OPCAT. It referred to inequalities between Aboriginals and other Canadians; the divide in economic security and well-being, and the continued violence against Aboriginal women. The United Kingdom made recommendations. 98. Costa Rica was concerned about the possibility that minors victims of sexual exploitation could be brought to trial for offences regarding child prostitution. It asked why Canada had not ratified OPCAT, if it has independent national mechanisms for visits to detention facilities and given the active participation of Canada during the elaboration of this instrument. Costa Rica made a recommendation. 99. Uruguay highlighted measures to protect women and children from violence, penal reform, the 2012 action plan to combat trafficking, the institutional and legal responses to protect the most vulnerable and support provided to the elderly. Uruguay made recommendations. 100. Uzbekistan noted the concerns expressed by treaty bodies about the rights of Aboriginal people and national minorities and cases of violence against women and girls from Aboriginal communities, and excessive use of force by the police. Uzbekistan made recommendations. 101. Viet Nam commended Canada for its programmes to guarantee social inclusion, equality and tolerance. It noted, however, that discrimination based on gender, race and religion tended to rise in multiple forms, particularly against ethnic minorities and migrants. Viet Nam made a recommendation. 102. Afghanistan noted various initiatives to implement UPR recommendations, to improve the socioeconomic conditions of its citizens, especially First Nations and Aboriginal people, in areas such as health, education, housing, and protection of persons with disabilities; and promoting social inclusion and equality. 103. Algeria recalled that UPR demonstrated that no country was exempted from human rights problems. For instance, the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression and others had expressed concern over restrictions to peaceful reunion. Algeria made recommendations. 104. Argentina acknowledged the establishment of the National Action Committee on Access to Justice in Civil and Family Matters. It also noted the initiative of communities that take into account the needs of the elderly. Argentina made recommendations. 105. Armenia noted that the Armenian community in Canada had been fully integrated and enjoyed the positive impact of multicultural policies. It recognized the commitment of Canada to eliminate impunity of crimes against humanity, including genocide. Armenia made a recommendation. 106. Australia commended Canada’s commitment to human rights and welcomed the implementation of UPR recommendations, including on human trafficking and persons with disabilities. It welcomed initiatives to monitor violence against indigenous women but was concerned by shortcomings in data collection. Australia made recommendations. 107. Belarus noted a lack of cooperation with special procedures, excessive force against demonstrators, discrimination against migrants, overcrowding in corrective institutions and cruel treatment of inmates. Belarus made recommendations. 108. Benin praised Canada for consultations on the report, which encouraged discussion of human rights issues. It noted efforts for Aboriginal rights, territorial and land claims and education for Aboriginal children, but encouraged increased efforts to prevent violence against women and children. 109. Bosnia and Herzegovina asked Canada to detail measures taken in cases of missing or murdered Aboriginal women and girls in British Columbia. It also asked about employment insurance and efforts to tackle employment and income support for vulnerable groups. 110. Botswana praised Canada’s commitments to human rights, the Canada-First Nations Joint Action Plan between the Government and the Assembly of First Nations, and empowerment and protection of vulnerable groups. Botswana made recommendations. 111. Brazil praised Canada’s implementation of UPR recommendations. It encouraged legislation to fully apply the principle of non-refoulement. It was concerned by inadequate integration of the Convention on the Rights of the Child in the legal system, leaving gaps in protection for children. Brazil made recommendations. 112. Bulgaria praised Canada for implementing UPR recommendations. It welcomed Canada’s prioritization of improvements to the situation of indigenous people. Bulgaria made recommendations. 113. Burkina Faso praised Canada for implementing UPR recommendations. It welcomed criminal legislation reforms, protection and integration of indigenous peoples, ratification of human rights instruments and steps against human trafficking. Burkina Faso made a recommendation. 114. Burundi observed that Canada was committed to strengthening its relations with indigenous peoples and to solving their land claims. It also noted efforts towards integration of citizens of diverse origins and against racial discrimination. Burundi made recommendations. 115. Cambodia noted efforts for promoting social inclusion and equality, combating racial discrimination and protecting women and children from violence. It welcomed Canada’s CRPD ratification and its National Action Plan to Combat Human Trafficking. Cambodia made recommendations. 116. Cape Verde noted Canada’s extensive institutional and procedural human rights network, including a tribunal dealing with claims by Aboriginal peoples. Cape Verde made recommendations. 117. Canada noted that First Nations enjoy universal and comprehensive health care, like all Canadians. Despite progress, Canada recognizes that there are still gaps in the health status of First Nations and Inuit. Canada’s Government is committed to high-quality health services for Aboriginal communities, and offers First Nations and Inuit primary health care in more than 600 communities, including many complementary services, as well as support for health services capacity at the community level. 118. Food security is not a challenge for most Canadian families, but there are vulnerable families for whom it is, and Canada takes the issue very seriously. The Nutrition North Canada Program was noted as one example of programmes that enhance food security of Aboriginal communities. 119. Addressing suicide has been a priority for Aboriginal communities and Canada has worked in partnership with these communities to reduce it. 120. Canada’s view is that irregular arrivals can present a legitimate security risk and referred to three safeguards that were in place: only the Minister of Public Safety can designate that an arrival is irregular; children under 16 are exempt from detention; and those who are determined to be refugees are released from detention on designation as a refugee. 121. Bias-free policing commitment and independent review commissions speak to the importance of the independent review process of Canada’s policing system. 122. On sexual exploitation of children, Canada uses a collaborative, multifaceted approach, involving criminal law reforms, to address support to victims and prevention measures. Canada’s Criminal Code provides comprehensive prohibitions, including against commercial sexual exploitation, all forms of child pornography, child trafficking and child sex tourism. Recent legislative changes strengthen these protections. 123. The head of the delegation thanked delegates for their participation, reiterating that Canada had sought to provide an honest assessment of progress since its first universal periodic review. 124. She noted that the Government of Canada has an enduring relationship with Aboriginal peoples, shaped over centuries, rooted in a complex history, and currently propelled forward by progressive partnerships and meaningful investments that target real results and empower Aboriginal people and their communities to generate positive and lasting change. It is in this spirit of renewing Crown-Aboriginal relationships that the Government has taken action over the last five years, prioritizing areas such as education and economic development that are critical to a young and rapidly growing Aboriginal population. 125. She underscored that Canada remained deeply committed to preventing and reducing all forms of violence against women and girls, working across jurisdictions to protect communities and ensure the safety of women and girls. Canada acknowledged the seriousness of the issue of missing and murdered Aboriginal women and was actively working to reduce violence and improve safety for Aboriginal women and girls in Canada. 126. She emphasized that multiculturalism and diversity are core Canadian values. No society is free from discrimination but all levels of government in Canada, working in partnership with civil society including minority communities, are seized of fostering social inclusion for all Canadians. 127. She noted that Canada would carefully consider all recommendations, focusing on those based on an objective assessment of the human rights situation in Canada and that were specific, concrete, achievable and measurable.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**   ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 128. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue and listed below will be examined by Canada which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the 24th session of the Human Rights Council in September 2013: 128.1. Ratify international human rights instruments to which Canada has not yet become party (Burkina Faso); 128.2. Sign Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (OPCAT) (Australia); Ratify Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (OPCAT) (Argentina, Bulgaria, Estonia, Germany, Hungary, Netherlands, France, Portugal, Tunisia); Become a party to Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (OPCAT) (Montenegro); Accede to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (OPCAT) and establish its national protective mechanism accordingly (Czech Republic); Ratify Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and engage in a consultation process with all relevant actors, including civil society, concerning the establishment and structure of a national preventive mechanism (New Zealand); Ratify Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture thereby set a useful precedent for other States who may be considering ratification (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); Speed up internal discussions for the early signing and ratification of OPCAT and establish, accordingly, the national prevention mechanism (Uruguay); 128.3. Consider ratifying International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW) (Peru); Accede International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW) (Honduras, Cape Verde); Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW) (Argentina Chile, Guatemala, Ecuador, Morocco, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Algeria); Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families to further promote and protect migrants, in particular undocumented and irregular migrants (Indonesia); 128.4. Consider ratifying the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CPED) (Argentina); Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CPED) (Cuba, Japan, Spain, France, Tunisia); Finish the training process for government and federal officials in order to launch as soon as possible the process of ratification of the CPED, and accept the competence of its monitoring body (Uruguay); 128.5. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (OP-CRPD) (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Argentina, France, Portugal, Spain); 128.6. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (OP-ICESCR) (Costa Rica, France, Portugal, Spain); 128.7. Withdraw its reservations made to article 37 (c) of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) and to establish a federal Children’s Ombudsman (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 128.8. Ratify Optional Protocol to CRC on a communication procedures to further ensue the rights of children victims (Costa Rica); Consider signing and ratifying Optional Protocol to CRC on a communication procedures to further ensue the rights of children victims (Slovakia); Become party to the Optional Protocol to CRC on a communication procedures to further ensue the rights of children victims (Thailand); 128.9. Ratify the Rome Statute (France); 128.10. Ratify the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons (Ecuador); 128.11. Ratify ILO Convention No. 138 concerning the minimum age for admission to employment (Bulgaria, Ecuador); 128.12. Consider the ratification of ILO Convention No. 169 (Ecuador, Nicaragua, Paraguay); 128.13. Ratify ILO Convention No. 189 (Ecuador); 128.14. Ratify American Convention on Human Rights (Brazil); Give priority to the ratification American Convention on Human Rights; accession to the American Convention on Human Rights in order to adjust its legislation to the standards of the Inter-American system of promotion and protection of human rights (Uruguay); Consider ratifying American Convention on Human Rights including the possibility of making reservations or interpretative declarations to Article 4, as done by other countries in the region (Mexico); 128.15. Ratify the 1960 UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 128.16. Establish a comprehensive legal framework in such a manner that the provisions of the CRC and its Optional Protocols will be fully incorporated (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 128.17. Incorporate in its legislation a specific offence criminalizing and punishing acts of racist violence (Burundi); 128.18. Introduce legislations to criminalize acts of violence on the basis of race and religion (Pakistan); 128.19. Adopt a legislation concerning xenophobia, incitement to hatred and hatred to blacks, and to criminalize racial violence (Sudan); 128.20. Define racial violence as an offence (Togo); 128.21. Remove disparities in the implementation of anti-racism legislation, policies, programmes and best practices; and ensure, without discrimination, the enjoyment of all people living under its jurisdiction of the rights set forth in ICERD by, inter alia, adopting new federal laws (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 128.22. Ensure the full transposition into national law of the provisions of the CAT (France); 128.23. Revise its legislation and administrative practices to correct the amendment of birth certificates in which the name of the father is removed as a consequence of births out of wedlock (Uruguay); 128.24. Pursue the actions in favour of the elderly and persons with disabilities (Senegal); 128.25. Continue implementing measures to protect elderly workers (Romania); 128.26. Closely monitor the situation of other disadvantaged groups such as women migrant workers and women prisoners (Turkey); 128.27. Adopt an action plan to implement the recommendations and voluntary commitments undertaken during its first Universal Periodic Review (Togo); 128.28. That relevant civil society groups are consulted in implementation of recommendations by treaty monitoring bodies and that their views are given due consideration (Ireland); 128.29. Analyse each of the United Nations treaty bodies recommendations in close cooperation with civil society to implement them or to report publicly on the reasons why it considers their implementation not appropriate (Portugal); 128.30. Continue to engage with civil society groups and demonstrate that challenges presented by relationships between its federal, provincial and territorial governments do not present unnecessary obstacle to ensuring implementation of its international human rights obligations (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 128.31. Adopt the national strategy for the overall implementation of the CRC and establish a mechanism for coordinated follow-up (Republic of Moldova); 128.32. Continue to cooperate fully with all United Nations human rights mechanisms (Portugal); 128.33. Resolve outstanding commitments with the human rights mechanisms and special procedures through the preparation of outstanding reports and the facilitation of requested visits of three Special Rapporteurs (Sierra Leone); 128.34. Engage in a constructive cooperation with United Nations special procedures (Slovakia); 128.35. Accept to adhere its human rights record to the examination of the human rights experts and the relevant bodies and other United Nations mechanisms on the same manner of all members of the United Nations and in accordance with the existing rules and regulations (Sudan); 128.36. Organize visits to Canada of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants, the Special Rapporteur on torture, the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial executions, the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and children and the Special Rapporteur on sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (Belarus); 128.37. Renew its commitment in favour of a national strategy to fight against racism (Togo); 128.38. Continue its efforts to combat racial discrimination (Gabon); 128.39. Strengthen the coordination of federal and provincial mechanisms in order to remove disparities in the implementation of anti-racism legislation, policies, and programmes, and ensure the enjoyment on an equal footing within all provinces and territories of the rights set forth in the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD), including by considering to adopt new federal laws (Indonesia); Strengthen the coordination of federal and provincial mechanisms in order to remove disparities in the implementation of anti-racism legislation, policies, and programmes, and ensure the enjoyment on an equal footing within all provinces and territories of the rights set forth in the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD), including by considering to adopt new federal laws (Egypt); 128.40. Strengthen efforts in the fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance (Senegal); 128.41. Make further efforts in the fight against all forms of discrimination and intolerance (Viet Nam); 128.42. Intensify its efforts to fight against all forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, including Islamophobia (Algeria); 128.43. Take measures to prohibit targeting, profiling and harassment of Muslims (Pakistan); 128.44. Encourage high level State officials and politicians to take a clear position against racist or xenophobic political speech (Tunisia); 128.45. Take the necessary measures aimed at removing the root causes of racial discrimination, xenophobia and overincarceration of Aboriginals, Afro-Canadians and ethnic minorities including women (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 128.46. Step up its measures to combat racism, racial discrimination and xenophobia especially against the Muslim, indigenous and minority communities in the country (Malaysia); 128.47. Step up the implementation of the recommendations of the Committee against Torture, the Committee on the CRC and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and, in particular, continue its efforts against all forms of discrimination against minorities in education (Paraguay); 128.48. Intensify ongoing efforts in the fight against racism, particularly against racial violence (Djibouti); 128.49. Continue to eliminate racial discrimination, and put racial violence as criminal offence, with a view to protecting all the rights of minorities including newly arrived immigrants and better integrating into the society (China); 128.50. Intensify efforts made so far to identify and eradicate racism (Holy See); 128.51. Continue its work in combating religiously motivated crimes and acts of violence (Jordan); 128.52. Continue to strengthen measures to eliminate racial profiling, especially in law enforcement and racial discrimination in employment (Botswana); 128.53. Continue to address the problems relating to minority groups including Aboriginal peoples, Metis and African Canadians, as identified in the first cycle of the UPR (Sierra Leone); 128.54. Further facilitate access to justice by persons belonging to minority groups (Hungary); 128.55. Take the necessary measures to ensure that minorities have access to employment (Argentina); 128.56. Ensure further effective implementation of the recently established programmes/policies on the protection of the principles and the rights of minorities that requires an equal approach and respect for each minority’s different characteristics (Cambodia); 128.57. Adopt legislative and administrative measures to improve the living conditions of indigenous peoples, effectively combat and prevent violent action against indigenous women and girls through legal measures (China); 128.58. Take effective legal measures with a view to the adoption of a national plan of action so that the rights of indigenous peoples will be respected and all forms of violence against Aboriginal women and girls will be ended (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 128.59. Abolish all discriminatory implications of the Indian Act and grant women and men the same rights with regard to their aboriginal status (Germany); 128.60. Consider the adoption of a national plan of action in pursuance of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP) and implement, inter alia, the recommendations of the CRC on the national system to protect Aboriginal children (Cape Verde); 128.61. Adopt, in consultation with indigenous peoples, a national action plan for the implementation of the UNDRIP (Mexico); 128.62. Adopt a comprehensive strategy on the situation of Aboriginal people at the federal level, to intensify the monitoring of the Nutrition North Canada Program, launched in 2011 and to develop a national plan of action (Bulgaria); 128.63. Enhance, through consultation mechanisms, the participation of indigenous peoples in the determination of public policies that affect them (Peru); 128.64. Ensure parity of funding and services between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal communities (United States of America); 128.65. Continue to strengthen its relationship with indigenous peoples (Gabon); 128.66. Give full effect to the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP) (Togo); 128.67. Take all necessary measures, including the implementation of the UNDRIP, to ensure to its indigenous peoples the full enjoyment of all their human rights, including economic, social and cultural rights, so that their quality of life is similar to the rest of citizens (Cuba); 128.68. Implement the recommendation of CERD to realise the economic, social and cultural rights of aboriginal people (Turkey); 128.69. Adopt effective measures to implement political, economic, social and culture rights of aboriginal communities and minorities, as well as prevent discrimination against them (Uzbekistan); 128.70. Continue to ensure the human rights of the Aboriginal people, including by realizing their economic, social and cultural rights (Indonesia);  128.71. Continue in its endeavours to consistently address the skills development and training needs of Aboriginal peoples to ensure access to sustained decent work (Trinidad and Tobago); 128.72. Step up its efforts in order to raise the level of employment and education of indigenous peoples and to react to the difficulties facing people living in isolated communities (Gabon); 128.73. Continue its efforts to improve access to health services for indigenous peoples (Burundi); 128.74. Ensure the right to health, and an adequate standard of living for the First Nations, Metis and Inuit (Namibia); 128.75. Continue to promote the empowerment of Aboriginal peoples, primarily through the protection of their lands, their education and their health (Holy See);128.76. Continue its efforts to develop and implement sustainable solutions engaging relevant provincial government, as well as representatives of Aboriginals, on issues such as guaranteeing the property rights for Aboriginals and their participation on issues related to natural resources development (Republic of Korea); 128.77. Address the issues raised by the Special Rapporteur on the right to food concerning the deep and severe food insecurity faced by Aboriginal peoples across Canada living both on and off reserves, in remote and urban areas, especially for children (Namibia); 128.78. Take further measures to increase the political representation of indigenous peoples, and expand the dialogue with these communities so that they can better represent their perspectives in the decision-making process (Morocco);   128.79. Continue its work to advance equality for women and to promote their full participation in all fields (Jordan); 128.80. Ensure effective implementation of CEDAW at the federal, provincial and territorial levels with particular attention to Aboriginal women and girls (Turkey); 128.81. Continue its laudable efforts to fight all forms of violence against women and girls (Botswana); 128.82. Continue fighting violence against women and girls so as to incite the majority of states to follow suit (Côte d'Ivoire); 128.83. Continue its efforts to prevent and punish all forms of violence against women and girls, particularly indigenous women and girls (Peru); 128.84. Take all appropriate measures to address violence against indigenous women (Sweden); 128.85. Take effective measures to combat violence against Aboriginal girls and women (Cape Verde); 128.86. Put an end to all forms of violence against Aboriginal women and girls (Honduras); 128.87. All necessary measures be taken to address all forms of violence against Aboriginal women and girls (India); 128.88. Expand services and support to prevent violence and discrimination against Aboriginal women and girls (United States of America); 128.89. Take further steps to prevent and protect Aboriginal women and children from all forms of violence (Estonia); 128.90. Regarding combating all forms of violence against Aboriginal women and girls, support effective participation of Aboriginal peoples, especially women and their organizations, in the development, implementation and evaluation of measures taken (Finland); 128.91. Continue with the measures for the promotion of women's rights, primarily by preventing and combating violence against women, particularly those belonging to indigenous peoples (France); 128.92. Strengthen measures to eradicate violence against women and children, especially those belonging to indigenous peoples and diverse ethnic groups (Ecuador); 128.93. Develop strategies to address the causes and consequences of violence against Aboriginal women and girls (Togo); 128.94. Work proactively with partners to address the violence against Aboriginal women and its root causes (United Kingdom); 128.95. Put an end to all forms of violence against women and girls belonging to Aboriginal communities (Uzbekistan); 128.96. Develop a national plan of action to end violence against indigenous women and take the necessary measures to ensure that national protection laws against domestic violence are enforced at all levels in a consistent and effective manner (Switzerland); 128.97. Develop and implement a national plan of action to address violence afflicting indigenous women and girls, providing for an adequate reaction of authorities and a resolution to the root causes of the violence (Slovakia); 128.98. Devise a national action plan to address the structural roots of violence, raise awareness, and ensure effective access to justice, redress and protection for indigenous women (Slovenia); 128.99. Develop a comprehensive national strategy for addressing violence against Aboriginal women in a timely manner and in collaboration with relevant stakeholders such as Aboriginal women’s organizations (New Zealand); 128.100. In collaboration with indigenous representatives, implement concrete measures, so that a comprehensive and coordinated national action plan can be under way by 2015, as recommended by the United Nations Secretary-General’s campaign to end violence against women (Norway); 128.101. Carry out, with the Special Procedures of the Council, an independent investigation of cases of disappearances and murders of Aboriginal women and girls (Belarus); 128.102. Ensure access to justice; investigating an alarming pattern of violence afflicting indigenous women throughout the country and allegations of an inadequate response by authorities, as well as addressing the root causes of violence against indigenous women in order to end all forms of violence against Aboriginal women and girls (Indonesia); 128.103. Continue its support and assistance to the provincial and territorial governments in improving the response of law enforcement and justice system to cases of violence against women and children in Aboriginal communities (Montenegro); 128.104. Develop a comprehensive national action plan for addressing violence against indigenous women, and, also, give due consideration to an independent national enquiry into missing indigenous women (Ireland); 128.105. Implement measures to ensure that the Aboriginality of victims of gender-based violence is accurately recorded (Australia); 128.106. Continue to effectively address domestic violence, ensuring to victims operational access to means of protection and reinforcing prosecution of perpetrators (Cyprus); 128.107. Continue effectively implementing its action plan to combat human trafficking and further promote gender equality in the country with an increase in funding for the protection and promotion of women’s rights (Cambodia); 128.108. Continue placing special emphasis on the victim-oriented approach to address the challenges of human trafficking in the country (Thailand); 128.109. Intensify efforts made so far to identify and eradicate trafficking in children and women for the sex trade (Holy See); 128.110. Establish mechanisms and procedures for the protection of rights of child victims of human trafficking (Uzbekistan); 128.111. Develop mechanisms and procedures to better protect the rights of children victims of trafficking, and provide training for police and prosecutors in this regard (Republic of Moldova); 128.112. Take strong measures in addressing the concern raised by the Committee on the CRC on the lack of prevention of child sexual exploitation (Malaysia); 128.113. Adopt comprehensive measures to combat paedophilia and the growth of child prostitution (Belarus); 128.114. Introduce a national minimum age of 16 for employment and adopt measures to ensure protection for children under the age of 18 from hazardous and unsafe working environments (Uzbekistan); 128.115. Consider the recommendation of the Committee on Rights of the Child (Committee on the CRC) to raise the minimum age of voluntary military recruitment (Chile); 128.116. Consider the possibility of raising the minimum age for voluntary recruitment to 18 years and, in the meantime, give priority to older candidates in the process of volunteer recruitment (Uruguay); 128.117. Urge Canada to amend its legislation on child prostitution in order to protect a child from prosecution or punishment for prostitution (Iceland); 128.118. Explicitly criminalize corporal punishment of children (Iceland); 128.119. Enhance its system for the protection of children by consideration of the establishment of a national Ombudsperson for Children (Trinidad and Tobago); 128.120. Strengthen children’s protection by establishing a federal Children’s Ombudsman or Commission, address disparities in access to services by all children, establish mechanisms to protect child victims of trafficking and prevent child sexual exploitation by ensuring criminalization of relevant offences (India); 128.121. Change its policy in order for the commutation of death sentences to be effectively claimed for all Canadian citizens sentenced to the death penalty abroad (Netherlands); 128.122. Strengthen its cooperation on issues of extradition and guarantee the cooperation and responsiveness of financial institutions with regard to requests for recovering assets of illicit origin (Tunisia); 128.123. Recognize in the national legislation access to water and sanitation as a human right, and develop a national plan to guarantee it, in consultation with indigenous peoples and the society in general, in order to reduce the gap in access to this right between indigenous peoples and the rest of society (Ecuador); 128.124. Develop a national strategy to combat poverty (Russian Federation); Develop a national strategy aimed at eliminating poverty and homelessness (Cuba); Develop plans or strategies to address homelessness and poverty (Egypt); Develop comprehensive national strategies to address homelessness and poverty (Sri Lanka); 128.125. Having in mind the growing number of cases of people who have resorted to food banks, elaborate a national plan on food security with a view to the realization of the universal human right to food (Brazil); 128.126. Further enhance its efforts in social protection and security for people living in poverty, such as considering formulating the necessary poverty alleviation and homelessness strategies (Malaysia); 128.127. Reinforce policies and programmes developed to address poverty, homelessness, food insecurity as well as access to quality health-care services and education, with special focus on the most disadvantaged groups, such as Aboriginal peoples (Slovakia); 128.128. Address disparities in access to social services by all, especially children, and continue the dialogue that will significantly advance on this matter (Côte d’Ivoire); 128.129. Take steps to ensure that all Canadian children have equal access to government services, such as health, education and welfare, and address the disparities in access to these services for indigenous children in particular, as recommended by the Committee on the CRC (Norway); 128.130. Recognize the right to safe drinking water and sanitation (Germany); 128.131. Recognize the human right to water and sanitation (Spain); 128.132. Strengthen the guarantees for access to drinking water and sanitation for the entire population, especially for indigenous populations and the most remote areas (Spain); 128.133. Take steps, including legislation and sufficient funding, to ensure that all Canadians have full and equal access to clean water and sanitation, in line with the United Nations resolution passed in 2012, recognizing the human right to water and sanitation (Norway);  128.134. Ensure the access to education for all children, including those belonging to indigenous peoples (France); 128.135. Take measures to integrate minority children in the school system with a view to preventing segregation and discrimination (Sri Lanka); 128.136. Take further effective measures to ensure access to education for all Aboriginal girls and women as an essential part of the full realization of their human rights (Finland); 128.137. Make every effort to ensure that the graduation rate from the First Nations’ students reaches the level of other Canadian students (Chad); 128.138. Continue to strengthen and promote human rights education, including through joint educational programmes with national minorities (Armenia); 128.139. Continue to implement concrete measures to facilitate and favour access to education and employment for indigenous peoples (Burundi); 128.140. Redouble its efforts to promote access to higher education on conditions of equality and to reduce financial barriers that prevent access to that level of education (Peru); 128.141. Continue taking measures to protect the rights of persons with disabilities (Romania); 128.142. Continue efforts to improve the rights of persons with disabilities (Djibouti); 128.143. Encourage the inclusion of boys and girls with disabilities in the general education system (Spain); 128.144. Ensure that children with disabilities have access to inclusive education (Egypt); 128.145. Implement and enforce national uniform standards of access to buildings, information, and communications for persons with disabilities (United States of America); 128.146. Revise the legal provisions on mandatory detention of migrants and asylum seekers included in the category of irregular entries, in accordance with the recommendation of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (Committee on CERD) (Mexico); 128.147. Ensure the protection of refugees, migrants and members of their families in full compliance with international standards (Belarus); 128.148. Take the necessary measures to prevent cruel and discriminatory treatment against asylum seekers, migrants and refugees, especially if these are minors, and ensure compliance with the principle of non-refoulement of the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees (Ecuador); 128.149. Take appropriate measures to address problems faced by immigrant skilled workers in relation to gaining employment on par with their education, experience and skills (Sri Lanka); 128.150. Take steps to reduce the employment gap among immigrants through provision of employment opportunities (Pakistan); 128.151. Continue efforts towards the establishment and implementation of an effective regulatory framework for holding companies registered in Canada accountable for the human rights impact of their operations (Egypt); 128.152. Take steps to increase its Official Development Assistance to developing countries which now stands at 0.3 per cent of GDP (Sierra Leone); 128.153. Ensure that its counter-terrorism efforts are in compliance with international human rights obligations (Pakistan); 128.154. Continue its efforts to bring its system of security certificates into compliance with international human rights standards (Switzerland); 128.155. Keep on reflecting on whether to further revise the legal framework regarding the stun guns, with a view of limiting their use to situations involving an imminent threat of death or serious injury (Italy); 128.156. Put an end to the disproportionate use of force by the police against all citizens, in particular, Afro-Canadians (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 128.157. Take measures to address concerns of reports that certain communities feel targeted, profiled and harassed by Canada’s national security legislation and build confidence among such communities (India); 128.158. Investigate allegations of ill-treatment and excessive use of force by the police and prosecute perpetrators (Uzbekistan); 128.159. Investigate thoroughly all cases of the detention of persons who have entered Canada, including Russian citizens, on non-security grounds and also information about cruel treatment vis-à-vis these people; pressure being used against them and demands that they provide personal information and the unjustified searches that have been carried out as well (Russian Federation); 128.160. Carry out an investigation into the possible involvement by officials of the Calgary prison in the brutal beating of August 2012 in the pre-trial detention facility cell of the Russian student, Telyakov by family name, arrested on trumped up charges, which were subsequently withdrawn (Russian Federation); 128.161. Put an end to the violations of the right to peaceful assembly and freedom of expression, torture and other ill-treatment (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 128.162. Reconsider its policy of using administrative detention and immigration legislation to detain and remove non-citizens on the ground of national security (Egypt). 129. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English only]   Composition of the delegation The delegation of Canada was headed by H.E. Ms. Elissa Golberg, Ambassador and Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations at Geneva and composed of the following members: • Ms. Josée Touchette, Senior Assistant Deputy Minister, Policy and Strategic Direction, Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada; • Ms. Martha LaBarge, Director General, Strategic Management and Human Rights, Canadian Heritage; • Mr. Paul MacKinnon, Assistant Deputy Minister, Strategic Policy, Public Safety Canada; • Mr. Michel Roy, Senior Assistant Deputy Minister, Health Canada; • Ms. Siobhan Harty, Director General, Social Policy, Department of Human Resources and Skills Development Canada; • Ms. Erin Brady, Senior Counsel, Human Rights Law Section, Justice Canada; • Ms. Karen McCarthy, Conseillère, Droits de la personne et Affaires autochtones, Direction des organisations internationales, Ministère des Relations internationales, Gouvernement du Québec; • Ms. Alison LeClaire Christie, Deputy Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations at Geneva; • Ms. Jennifer Irish, Minister Counsellor (Humanitarian Affairs), Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations at Geneva; • Ms. Anne-Tamara Lorre, Counsellor (Human Rights), Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations at Geneva; • Mr. Joshua Tabah, Counsellor (Humanitarian Affairs), Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations at Geneva; • Ms. Esther van Nes, First Secretary (Legal Affairs and environment), Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations at Geneva; • Ms. Manon Boisclair, Second Secretary (Human Rights), Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations at Geneva; • Ms. Mary Pierre-Wade, Second Secretary (Human Rights), Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations at Geneva.     