Distr.: General 4 December 2013 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-fifth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* China (including Hong Kong, China and Macao, China) * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.13-18855 *1318855* 
Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–175 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–24 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 25–185 5 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 186–187 13  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 29 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its seventeenth session from 21 October to 1 November 2013. The review of China was held at the 3rd meeting on 22 October 2013. The delegation of China was headed by Mr. Wu Hailong. At its 10th meeting held on 25 October 2013, the Working Group adopted the report on China. 2. On 14 January 2013, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of China: Poland, Sierra Leone and the United Arab Emirates. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of China: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/17/CHN/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/17/CHN/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/17/CHN/3 and Corr.1).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Canada, Cuba, the Czech Republic, Germany, Myanmar, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America was transmitted to China through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR). I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation of China indicated that it established an inter-agency task force composed of nearly 30 national legislative, administrative and judiciary departments to prepare the report and held consultations with more than 20 representative NGOs and academic institutions, and solicited public opinion through a website. 6. The recommendations accepted four years ago either have been implemented or are being carried out. Fully respecting and protecting human rights was identified as one of the goals in building a moderately prosperous society in all respects. 7. China formulated and published the National Human Rights Action Plan of China (2012–2015) in June 2012. 8. From 2008 to 2012, rural and urban income increased by 9.9 per cent and 8.8 per cent annually. China implemented the Outline of Development-Oriented Poverty Reduction for China’s Rural Areas (2011–2020), leading to a drastic decline in those among the rural population living in poverty. 9. In the past four years, China helped 28 million university graduates find jobs. In 2012, 12.66 million urban jobs were created and 260 million rural migrant workers found jobs in cities. China established a minimum wage adjustment mechanism generally. 10. The ratio of government spending on education to GDP increased from 3.31 per cent to 4.07 per cent. Free nine-year compulsory education has been accessible throughout the country. 11. China has established a nationwide primary medical insurance system and over 1.3 billion people have joined various medical insurance schemes. The subsistence allowance programme has basically covered all urban and rural areas.  12. From 2009 to 2012, the Government set aside over 450 billion yuan in assistance funds to build government-subsidized urban apartments and renovate shanty areas. 13. China has made the reduction of major pollutants a mandatory target in economic and social development and taken steps to improve mechanisms, strengthen supervision and resolve outstanding environmental problems. 14. China encourages greater public involvement in the legislative process by publishing draft laws and holding hearings, discussions and forums. 15. Deputies to the People’s Congresses are to be elected on the same population ratio in both urban and rural areas. Direct elections are held for more than 98 per cent of villagers’ committees. 16. All 60 tasks of the judicial system reform have been completed. The Amendment VIII to the Criminal Law abolished the death penalty for 13 economic and non-violent crimes. The procedures for the review of death penalty and the system to exclude the use of illegal evidence were improved and the application of coercive measures standardized. 17. China has taken concrete actions in protecting people’s freedom of speech and freedom of religious belief in accordance with law. People can express views freely through microblogs, postings and other means. There are 5,500 religious organizations, 100 religious universities and 140,000 sites for religious activities. 18. China has put the Law against Domestic Violence on its legislative agenda. Mechanisms designed to assist and guarantee the rights of orphans, children with disabilities and HIV/AIDS-affected children have been improved. Old-age insurance schemes had covered all rural areas and non-working urban residents. 19. Minority ethnic groups enjoy extensive human rights. Their freedom of religious belief and the right to use and develop their spoken and written languages are respected and guaranteed. 20. China is party to 26 international conventions and worked hard to implement them. Every year, China holds human rights dialogues or consultations with 20 countries. China has provided economic and technical assistance to other developing countries to help them realize their right to development. 21. China will increase its annual donation to OHCHR to US$ 800,000. It will receive the Working Group on the issue of discrimination against women in law and in practice and three other special procedures.  22. China faces difficulties and challenges in promoting and protecting human rights. Unbalanced, uncoordinated and unsustainable development remains an acute problem. Too many people still live in poverty. A balanced income distribution structure is yet to be put in place. Judicial injustice exists. 23. Hong Kong, China, implemented the statutory minimum wage in 2011 and amended the Personal Data (Privacy) Ordinance in 2012. The methods of selecting the Chief Executive in 2017 and forming the Legislative Council in 2016 should be strictly in accordance with the Basic Law and relevant interpretations and decisions of the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress. It will continue to enhance the protection of the rights of persons with disabilities, women and children, and provide support to individual groups, such as people with an ethnic minority background or a different sexual orientation. 24. Macao, China, has continued expanding resources for the optimization of all policies and measures in the area of livelihood on the basis of their existing work. It will continue to promote the stable development of the whole economy and ensure that the lawful rights and interests of the residents are protected. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 25. During the interactive dialogue, 137 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in chapter II of the present report. 26. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela praised the universal social pension system, the wide-reaching medical insurance system and high voter turnout. 27. Viet Nam commended the informative report and noted that human rights protection was an evolving process. 28. Yemen commended the remarkable achievements in economic and social development in China. 29. Zambia noted that more legislative and administrative reforms were necessary and implored China to continue with international cooperation. 30. Zimbabwe praised the comprehensive report, human rights programmes and the implementation of recommendations from the first UPR. 31. Afghanistan commended the promotion of human rights through legislative and judicial reforms, education and the National Human Rights Action Plan (NHRAP). 32. Albania welcomed the report of China and wished it all success in its future endeavours. 33. Algeria appreciated the amendment to the Criminal Procedure Law and the Law on Lawyers, broadening the range of cases open to them. 34. Angola commended the development of human rights frameworks, notably the strengthening of human rights mechanisms and improving social indicators. 35. Argentina praised NHRAP and amendments to legislation protecting older people, urging China to share best practices. 36. Australia recognized the steps taken by China since its UPR in 2009. 37. Austria was concerned about reports of discrimination and harassment of persons exercising their right to freedom of religion. 38. Azerbaijan commended reforms undertaken regarding ratification of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), adoption of the new NHRAP, and measures on social security and health. 39. Bahrain welcomed the implementation of previous recommendations and praised human rights education. 40. Bangladesh noted that China was addressing the challenges caused by rapid social development and appreciated its cooperation with developing countries. 41. Belarus welcomed measures to improve social and cultural rights and the situation of ethnic minorities. 42. Belgium was concerned at the non-ratification of ICCPR by China. 43. Benin noted that NHRAP would help address numerous challenges and invited the international community to support China. 44. Bhutan noted many achievements that China had made since its last review, particularly initiatives such as NHRAP for 2012–2015 and enhancing protection of the rights of the most vulnerable groups. 45. The Plurinational State of Bolivia commended the improvement to health conditions in China. 46. Bosnia and Herzegovina commended the steps to provide human rights education for leading officials, public servants and youth and requested examples of best practices in self-development of aid recipient countries. 47. Mauritius commended the improvements on the standard of living, mainly access to health facilities, and the protection of children’s rights. 48. Brazil encouraged China to persevere in its endeavours for the total abolition of the death penalty. 49. Brunei Darussalam commended the commitment to promoting and protecting human rights, particularly those of vulnerable groups. 50. Bulgaria commended the determination to stabilize employment levels and the reduction in the number of capital offences. 51. Burundi noted the legal and institutional reforms aimed at upholding economic and social rights and highlighted human rights education efforts. 52. Cambodia commended the accession of China to international human rights instruments, its socioeconomic development and poverty reduction measures. 53. Canada welcomed the Chinese delegation and thanked them for their participation. 54. Cape Verde acknowledged significant progress in economic and social rights. It encouraged the best possible balance between change and stability. 55. The Central African Republic welcomed significant economic and social development and strengthened guarantees of the rights to subsistence and development. 56. Chad commended increased investment in cultural institutions and events and improved cultural life for the population. 57. Chile acknowledged progress to overcome poverty and policies improving access to social security, health and education. 58. Comoros welcomed the success in the areas of education, health and the right to food. 59. The Congo welcomed efforts to guarantee economic, social and cultural rights. 60. Costa Rica highlighted the progress to overcome poverty and urged a de facto moratorium on the death penalty. 61. Côte d’Ivoire supported measures to reduce poverty in rural zones and to guarantee the right to food. 62. Mexico paid tribute to NHRAP and acknowledged cooperation with international human rights bodies. 63. Cyprus requested information on the efforts to achieve practical equality between men and women. 64. The Czech Republic warmly welcomed the delegation from China. 65. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea encouraged continued efforts to protect the rights of ethnic minorities to use and develop their own language and writing systems. 66. The Democratic Republic of the Congo commended progress in civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights. 67. Denmark expressed concern at the legalizing of enforced detention and, while recognizing increased access to the Internet, remained concerned about State censorship of media. 68. Djibouti noted ongoing protection of women’s rights through continued growth and social progress. 69. Ecuador recognized progress made in accessibility to legal protection for workers with disabilities. 70. Egypt commended the contribution of China to achieving internationally agreed development goals through South-South cooperation. 71. Equatorial Guinea noted improvements of regulations on food safety and encouraged continued human rights education and awareness. 72. Estonia welcomed efforts improving the human rights situation, such as NHRAP and the White Paper on Progress in Human Rights. 73. Ethiopia commended the Government for vigorously sharing its experience and best practices in the areas of poverty alleviation. 74. Finland requested information on measures adopted to investigate alleged intimidation and reprisals against individuals seeking to engage with the UPR process. 75. France thanked China for its presentation. 76. Gabon noted efforts to implement accepted 2009 UPR recommendations and priority given to the right to development for the benefit of vulnerable groups. 77. Germany encouraged China to continue to pursue legal improvements protecting the rights of individuals, inseparable from economic progress. 78. Ghana commended China on its participation in the second UPR, which contributed to strengthening global human rights architecture. 79. Greece noted that China could focus on human rights education to government agencies, especially on the rights of women, children and person with disabilities. 80. Guatemala noted legislative and judicial reforms in view of ratifying ICCPR. 81. Hungary noted the adherence to 26 international instruments and the number of pending requests by special procedures. 82. India requested information on re-education through the labour system, while noting NHRAP. 83. China indicated that it has made remarkable progress in promoting and safeguarding the right to development in recent years and its experience shows the need to: strike a balance between reform, development and stability; place great emphasis on poverty reduction; work hard to improve well-being and promote inclusive development; and enhance environmental and ecological protection. 84. China is committed to judicial independence. The courts and procuratorates exercise judicial and supervisory authorities independently. China retains the death penalty, but exercises strict control and caution in light of its current stage of social development. 85. China ensures implementation of human rights guarantees in the judicial field. Many achievements of the judicial reform are already reflected in the revised laws. 86. China protects the political, economic, cultural, educational and other lawful rights and interests of ethnic minority groups on multiple dimensions, including institution-building, laws, policies and measures. Ethnic minority regions have experienced rapid economic and social development. 87. China opposes torture, and those who commit torture are punishable by law. The freedom of assembly and association is protected in accordance with the Constitution. There is no arbitrary detention or forced disappearance in China. 88. In formulating and implementing NHRAP, China attaches importance to the role of the NGOs and academic institutions. Citizens fully enjoy the freedom of speech. It is the obligation of all Governments to crack down cybercrimes of all types. 89. China adheres to the policy of gender equality and gives priority to protection of children’s rights. China has formed a complete legal framework for protection of the rights of women and children, incorporating the development of women and children into the overall planning of economic and social development. 90. China protects the lawful rights and interests of religious groups and religious sites. Citizens enjoy full range of religious freedom. Those who engage in unlawful or criminal activities under the disguise of “religions” are punishable by law. 91. Remarkable achievements have been made in human rights endeavours in Tibet, where traditional culture and religious freedom are protected. The affordable housing projects in Tibetan-residing areas have been carried out on a voluntary basis, to the satisfaction of the vast majority of farmers and herdsmen. 92. Indonesia welcomed NHRAP, a national blueprint for human rights in the country. 93. The Islamic Republic of Iran praised China for its preservation of cultural heritage and enhancing its population’s quality of life. 94. Iraq welcomed measures towards accession to 26 international instruments. It emphasized the policy on freedom of religion and urged China to strive towards balance between confessions. 95. Ireland was concerned about the situation of human rights defenders and restrictions on civil society organizations in China. 96. Italy commended China for its constructive dialogue on human rights with the European Union and the downward trend in executions. 97. Jamaica noted the pursuit of necessary reforms to ratify ICCPR and encouraged China to strive for its early ratification. 98. Japan encouraged the efforts on civil and political rights, judicial procedures’ transparency, and rights of minorities, including Tibetans and Uighurs. 99. Jordan commended efforts to strengthen the institutional human rights framework. 100. Kazakhstan appreciated efforts for realizing the rights of ethnic minorities, including the Kazakh minority. 101. Kenya noted the adoption of NHRAP, which gave prominence to strategies for enhancing its people’s well-being. 102. Kuwait commended efforts to guarantee human rights, including the sixth national five-year plan for popularizing understanding of the law. 103. Kyrgyzstan recognized decisive steps taken in the judicial reforms, particularly the four areas of optimizing the allocation of judicial functions, implementing a balanced criminal policy, strengthening judicial team-building and the judiciary’s budget. 104. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic hoped that China would encourage its State organs and functionaries to communicate with the public to solicit their opinions and consider implementing suggestions raised by treaty bodies in accordance with its conditions. 105. Latvia noted the establishment of a national institutional framework for ratification of ICCPR, cooperation with special procedures and pending visit requests by mandate holders. 106. Lebanon noted efforts by China to strengthen its human rights institutional framework in relation to the UPR first-cycle recommendations. 107. Lesotho particularly commended the Law on Protection of the Rights and Interests of the Elderly and the progress of China in education. 108. Libya noted that the Government was in constant, cooperative contact with treaty bodies and had allocated more budgetary resources to complete its judicial reforms. 109. Malaysia recognized the commitment of China to upholding freedom of religious belief in accordance with its law. 110. Maldives encouraged China to include benchmarks for progress and measures for implementing NHRAP. 111. Mali noted that China had specifically included safeguarding of women and children’s rights in its general economic-development planning. 112. Mauritania valued far-reaching measures to promote and protect human rights, exemplified by its national policy on eliminating child labour, and access to health care and education. 113. Botswana appreciated the adoption of NHRAP but noted reports of human trafficking in China. 114. Cuba appreciated measures against criminal activities and encouraged China to continue defending its right to sovereignty. 115. Mongolia urged continued improvements to publications laws, and commended progress on access to education, housing and health care. 116. Morocco congratulated China on its progress towards achieving MDGs, resulting from adoption and implementation of a national policy. 117. Mozambique commended the economic performance of China and the raising of the poverty line in 2011. 118. Myanmar welcomed progress towards attaining MDGs, and noted ongoing judicial reform and subsequent changes to legislation. 119. Namibia commended China for promoting the human rights of citizens and non-nationals, and for cooperating with United Nations treaty bodies. 120. Nepal applauded new legislation and national institutions and noted efforts in education, health, and women and children’s rights. 121. The Netherlands encouraged China to continue enhancing civil and political rights. 122. New Zealand noted progress in economic and social rights to close the rural-urban income gap. It welcomed death penalty reform. 123. Nicaragua highlighted NHRAP and human rights-education promotion. It commended economic achievements and encouraged inequality eradication and better wealth distribution to achieve sustainable development. 124. The Niger welcomed the strengthening of the judicial and institutional framework and encouraged China to continue implementing NHRAP. 125. Nigeria commended China on consulting civil society organizations, academic institutions and the public in preparing the national report. 126. Norway welcomed preparations to ratify ICCPR and legal reforms, including on executions. It expressed concern regarding freedom of expression. 127. Oman commended the developments achieved by China, including its efforts in providing decent living standards in both urban and rural areas. 128. Pakistan commended promotion of economic and social development in Xinjiang Autonomous Region, ensuring freedom of belief and stability. 129. Poland expressed concerns regarding media and academic freedom and attempts to undermine freedom of religion, culture and expression of the Tibetan Buddhist community. 130. Portugal welcomed protection of economic and social rights, introduction of nine years of compulsory education and death penalty reforms. 131. Qatar commended actions to protect and promote human rights implemented under NHRAP. 132. The Republic of Korea welcomed the revision of the Exit-Entry Administration Law on the refugee status determination process. 133. The Republic of Moldova commended cooperation with UPR, recommendations implemented and measures adopted. 134. Romania noted adoption of NHRAP and progress in combating human trafficking and guaranteeing the right to education. 135. The Russian Federation welcomed achievements in human rights, especially in protection of rights of religious minorities and humanization of criminal legislation. 136. Rwanda welcomed improved health conditions and nine-year compulsory education and the amended use of the death penalty. 137. Saudi Arabia welcomed progress made, particularly in ethnic minority regions, at the political, cultural and educational levels. 138. Senegal commended the improved protection of the rights of women, children and the elderly and noted that development cooperation was a priority. 139. Serbia commended efforts in strengthening human rights legislation and encouraged China to further implement ratified treaties. 140. Seychelles acknowledged efforts to adopt policies and procedures in line with United Nations recommendations and encouraged China to further those efforts. 141. Sierra Leone noted the establishment of human rights safeguards, new human rights laws and efforts to address the right to development. 142. Singapore noted the strong emphasis on improving education infrastructure and facilities, including rural and ethnic minority areas.   143. Slovakia encouraged a review of the death penalty and enquired about civil society involvement in decision-making. 144. Slovenia encouraged ratification of ICCPR and integration of its provisions into domestic legislation. 145. South Africa highlighted the Government’s effective response to the global financial crisis. 146. South Sudan commended the response of China to the global financial crisis and special preferential policies to promote economic and social development in the Tibet Autonomous Region. 147. Spain commended the participation of China in the UPR process and acknowledged the trend towards reducing the use of the death penalty. 148. Sri Lanka commended the adoption of national action plans and MDG progress, and efforts in promoting the right to development and achieving food security, especially for vulnerable groups. 149. The State of Palestine acknowledged efforts to promote human rights and encouraged implementation of NHRAP. 150. China and other developing countries maintained close cooperation and supported each other. Since 2000, China has provided assistance to over 120 developing countries, built over 200 schools and 30 hospitals and malaria control centres, and trained 80,000 professionals of all types. 151. The delegation of Hong Kong, China, responded that press freedom is guaranteed by the Basic Law. Persons with disabilities enjoy the right to vote and stand for election in accordance with law. Disability discrimination in employment and the workplace is prohibited by legislation. Employment support and vocational training are provided to them. 152. The government of Macao, China, has been devoted to protecting the rights of the underprivileged groups by adopting different measures, such as enacting relevant legislation, implementing a 10-year plan for persons with disabilities and the elderly, granting subsidies and providing services for the needy. 153. China is making preparations for the ratification of ICCPR and will continue to carry out legislative and judicial reforms. 154. Lawyers in China participate in legislative process as well as policymaking and deliberations. The revised Law on Lawyers and the Criminal Procedure Law offer strong guarantees for lawyers to perform their duties. 155. China has implemented a comprehensive nine-year compulsory education system for all urban and rural dwellers and is committed to providing fair and quality education to all. Measures have been taken to speed up information-technology application in education, and make quality educational resources available to more people. 156. China is committed to keeping the channel open for people to express grievances and make complaints. It prohibits restriction of normal acts of petition in any forms, and would never allow suppression of petitioners or establishment of any forms of “black jails”.  157. Social organizations in China have developed in a healthy and orderly manner. The number of registered social organizations has reached 506,000. China is making efforts to push for reforms in the relevant areas, including strengthening legal development, perfecting supportive policies, and promoting separation of government and the social sector.  158. China implements family planning policy under the principle of combining national guidance with voluntary participation of its people. The Regulations on the Prevention and Treatment of HIV/AIDS provide that no organization or individual shall discriminate against HIV/AIDS infectors or patients or their families, and that HIV/AIDS patients enjoy the rights to employment, medical care and others.  159. China formulated over 60 laws and regulations on protection of various rights of the disabled. China enacted the Mental Health Law to protect rights of persons with intellectual disabilities. From 2008 to 2012, more than 6.2 million rural residents with disabilities were lifted out of poverty and 1.7 million urban residents with disabilities were employed. 160. China enacted laws and regulations to protect private property of its citizens. Compulsory enforcement of expropriation, demolition and relocation must observe the law to ensure fair compensation and provision of channels for corresponding legal relief and assistance. 161. The right to environment is regarded as a basic human right and is protected by law. China encourages orderly public participation and solicits the views of the general public and NGOs when drawing up policies on environment. 162. The Sudan welcomed continuous efforts to strengthen human rights and cooperation with human rights mechanisms, and the fight against violence, hate crimes and fraud.  163. Sweden referred to its advance questions and wished China a successful review. 164. Switzerland commended reduction in the scope of the application of death penalty but expressed concern about repression towards civil society. 165. The Syrian Arab Republic highly appreciated the open and subjective report displaying achievements strengthening human rights and plans in this field. 166. Tajikistan appreciated the strengthened legal and institutional human rights framework and noted that China was closer than ever to full implementation of its concept of “putting people first”. 167. Thailand commended the remarkable economic transformation and efforts to reduce poverty and promote equal opportunities. 168. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia commended activities in safeguarding economic and social rights and asked about plans to improve minority rights and to ratify ICCPR. It urged more cooperation with OHCHR in the judicial reforms. 169. Timor-Leste commended efforts for implementation of indemnificatory low-income housing projects, in particular, construction of more than 17 million urban housing units. 170. Togo commended efforts aimed at promoting economic and social development of ethnic minorities. 171. Tunisia encouraged continued efforts to promote civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights. 172. Turkmenistan noted the increasing number of leading officials in ethnic-minority regions who were of the local ethnicity. 173. Uganda noted the abolition of the death penalty for 13 non-violent economic crimes and amendment of the Criminal Procedure Law. 174. Ukraine welcomed efforts to protect the rights of women, children and persons with disabilities and to improve health and social welfare.  175. The United Arab Emirates appreciated the attention paid to the rights of the child through their incorporation in the national economic and social development plan.  176. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland expressed concern about restrictions on freedom of expression and association and urged greater transparency over the use of the death penalty. 177. The United Republic of Tanzania welcomed economic achievement, including affordable urban-housing construction and encouraged China to share its economic experience and practices with developing countries. 178. The United States of America was concerned about suppression of freedoms of assembly, association, religion and expression, policies harmful to ethnic minorities, and harassment, detention, and punishment of activists, including Xu Zhiyong and Yang Maodong. 179. Uruguay noted the adoption of a relevant legal framework and NHRAP, which included human rights education. 180. Uzbekistan noted NHRAP, legal reforms and attention paid to social and economic development in the regions. 181. Barbados commended active cooperation with treaty bodies and efforts to promote human rights education. It noted recent judicial reforms, which sought to strengthen the institutional framework for human rights promotion and protection. 182. Eritrea highlighted the commitment to promoting human rights as per domestic legislation and implementation of UPR recommendations. 183. Iceland urged China to intensify implementation of the law on gender equality and ensure access to special rapporteurs. 184. China was regretful that a small number of countries labelled its crackdown on terrorism that had undermined the security of civilians as cleansing of specific ethnic groups or religions, and glorified a few criminals in China as “human rights defenders”. It expressed its confidence in elevating the human rights of its people to a higher level. 185. China expressed its gratitude to most countries, developing countries in particular, who had recognized tremendous efforts and achievements made by China in human rights and had appreciated difficulties and challenges China was facing, and raised constructive ideas and recommendations. It committed to seriously studying all recommendations in light of its national conditions and giving feedback to the Human Rights Council on time. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations** 186. The following recommendations will be examined by China which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-fifth session of the Human Rights Council in March 2014: 186.1. Ratify ICCPR (Albania); Ratify ICCPR and CPED (Chile); Abide by its commitment of 2009 and establish a clear timeframe in order to ratify ICCPR (Belgium);Ratify both the ICCPR and the OP-CAT (Hungary); Timely ratify the ICCPR (Japan);Ratify the ICCPR, which was signed by China in 1998 (Maldives); Accede to the First OP to the ICCPR (Maldives);Ratify the ICCPR, which it signed in 1998 (Spain); Ratify ICCPR and OP-CAT (Sierra Leone); Ratify the ICCPR (France); ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 186.2. Ratify as soon as possible ICCPR (Brazil); Speed up the ratification of the ICCPR, which has been already signed by China (Bulgaria); Speed up the process of the ratification of the ICCPR (Estonia); Expedite the ratification of the ICCPR (Ghana);  186.3.  Consider ratifying ICCPR (Cape Verde);   186.4.  Take steps to an early ratification of the ICCPR (Czech Republic);  186.5.  Take steps towards the ratification of ICCPR (Benin);  186.6.  Continue carrying out administrative and judicial reforms to prepare  for the ratification of the ICCPR (Egypt); 186.7. Continue the actions undertaken with the view to ratifying the ICCPR (Guatemala); 186.8. Continue its national reforms with an aim to ratify the ICCPR (Latvia); 186.9. Continue to take measures towards ratification of the ICCPR (Botswana); 186.10. Move towards ratification of the ICCPR at the earliest possible date (New Zealand); 186.11. Move towards ratification of the ICCPR in the near future (Norway); 186.12. Continue its endeavours to ratify the ICCPR in the very near future (Portugal); 186.13. Expedite the efforts to ratify the ICCPR (Republic of Korea); 186.14. Accelerate administrative and legislative reforms with a view of ratifying the ICCPR (Tunisia); 186.15 Set out a clear legislative timetable for ratification of the ICCPR (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 186.16. Ratify the CPED, OP-CAT as well as the Rome Statute (Tunisia); 186.17. Take steps towards the ratification of ICCPR’s two optional protocols (Benin); 186.18. Speed up the process of ratification of the ICCPR-OP2 (Estonia); 186.19. Sign and ratify the OP-ICESCR and the OP-CRC-IC (Portugal); Sign the third OP-CRC-IC (Albania); 186.20. Ratify the Rome Statute of the ICC and the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the Court (Estonia); 186.21. Ratify outstanding core human rights instruments, including the ICCPR (Namibia); 186.22. Ratify OP-CEDAW (Spain); 186.23. Continue efforts to ratify the OP-CAT and CPED, as well as the main international human rights instruments to which the country is not yet a party (Argentina); Ratify the CPED and reform the Criminal Procedure Code with a view to guaranteeing the rights of those deprived of their liberty (France); 186.24. Consider acceding to the ICRMW (Egypt); 186.25. Consider becoming a party to the ICRMW (Ghana); instruments and relevant protocols (Mongolia); 186.26.  Consider the possibility of ratifying the ICRMW (Guatemala);  186.27.  Explore options to accede to the Rome Statute of the ICC (Latvia);  186.28.  Continue its  efforts  on the ratification of other human rights (NA);186.29. Consider signing and ratifying the third OP-CRC-IC (Seychelles); 186.30. Consider the possibility of acceding to the Rome Statute of the ICC as well as its Agreement on Privileges and Immunities (Uruguay); 186.31. Consider the possibility of acceding to the CPED and recognize the competence of its Committee (Uruguay); 186.32. Consider ratifying the ICCPR and establishing a National Human Rights Institution (Zambia); 186.33. Implement the national plan of action for human rights for 2012 - 2015 and assess its implementation (Sudan); 186.34. Continue the successful implementation of the new National Human Rights Action Plan (NHRAP) for 2012-2015 through its cooperation with OHCHR (Azerbaijan); 186.35. Consider including civil society in the assessment sessions of the National Action Plan on Human Rights and in the formulation and preparation of the corresponding National Report (Mexico); 186.36. Continue its progressive efforts and measures to implement the second NHRAP (Indonesia); 186.37. Prioritize the implementation of its NHRAP and its 12th Five-Year Plan for Economic and Social Development in the ethnic regions of minority groups as well as for other under-privileged communities (Sierra Leone); 186.38. Continue its efforts for promotion of human rights with particular attention to the fulfilment of the NHRAP for 2012 – 2015 (Ukraine); 186.39. Maintain human rights education as a basic part of its National Human Rights Action Plans, including the relevant training of law enforcement agents, public servants and youth (Cyprus); 186.40. Intensify greatly the numerous measures taken in this sector of human rights education (Burundi); 186.41. Continue human rights training for local officials, police commissioners, wardens and directors of Judicial Bureaus (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 186.42. Human rights education which includes training programmes for civil servants to promote human rights policy and mainstream it in various areas (Bahrain); 186.43. Share its experience on human rights education with countries requesting such need (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 186.44. Strengthen human rights education with a view of enhancing human rights awareness (Seychelles); 186.45. Integrate human rights knowledge into relevant courses and the legal education curriculum (State of Palestine); 186.46. Keep up its efforts in raising awareness among law enforcement officers and security personnel throughout the country (Thailand); 186.47.  Continue the human rights awareness and training of the population  (Togo);  186.48.  Include human rights education in training  programme  for the  government officials (Uzbekistan); 186.49. Harmonize the definition of torture contained in the national legislation with the requirements of the CAT and ensure that statements obtained under duress are not admitted in court (Mexico); 186.50. Continue to improve the legal system, so that it reflects the will expressed through the reform of 2012, in order to further ensure the protection of human rights (Niger); 186.51. Effectively implement and establish the necessary institutional mechanisms to ensure the enforcement of existing laws prohibiting torture and dismissing illegally obtained evidence (Denmark); 186.52. Concentrate on the implementation of the international human rights instruments that have been ratified by the country (Afghanistan); 186.53. Continue the reforms aimed at protecting and promoting human rights, particularly the strengthening of legislation and judicial guarantees (Gabon); 186.54. Continue its ongoing review of national laws to ensure that they are in line with its international human rights law obligations (Turkmenistan); 186.55. Follow the approach it took for economic, social and cultural rights with respect to civil and political rights, including freedom of religion or belief and the right to a fair trial (Slovakia); 186.56. Further guarantee the rights of life, education and health (South Africa); 186.57. Look into the possibility of establishing the national human rights institution in China (Thailand); 186.58. Continue efforts in theoretical research related to national human rights organs (Qatar); 186.59. Establish a national human rights institution, in accordance with the Paris Principles (New Zealand); Set up a national institution in line with the Paris Principles and ensure a climate that is favourable to the activities of human rights defenders, journalists and other civil society actors (Tunisia); 186.60. Keep up its commitment to uphold its human rights treaty obligations and engage constructively with the human rights mechanisms, including the special procedures (Ghana); 186.61. Ensure that its citizens can freely engage in the UPR process (Czech Republic); 186.62. Ensure that human rights defenders can exercise their legitimate activities, including participation in international mechanisms, without being subjected to reprisals (Switzerland); 186.63. Continue its constructive and cooperative dialogue with the UN human rights system (Azerbaijan); 186.64. Continue to give consideration to the views of treaty bodies and other mechanisms (Kenya); 186.65 Continue to maintain contact and constructive dialogue with the human rights treaty bodies (Nigeria); 186.66. Invite the UN Commission of Inquiry on Human Rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to visit North-Eastern China to meet officials and North Korean citizens who have fled to China (Canada); 186.67. Continue to play an active role in the works of the Human Rights Council and continue to contribute in solving the issues relating to human rights in a fair, objective and non-selective manner (Syrian Arab Republic); 186.68. Consider the possibility of extending an invitation to special procedures to visit China taking into account the appropriate balance between economic, social and cultural rights and  civil and political rights (Ecuador); 186.69. Intensify the cooperation with special rapporteurs mandate holders of the United Nations (Benin); Step up cooperation with Special Procedures and mandate holders (Albania); 186.70. Step up cooperation with the special procedures and consider extending a standing invitation to all special procedures mandate holders of the Human Rights Council (Latvia); Issue a standing invitation for UN human rights special procedures and accept all requested visits by mandate holders (Hungary); 186.71. Fully cooperate with OHCHR as well as special procedures (France); 186.72. Enhance cooperation with the OHCHR by agreeing to outstanding requests for visits to China and extending a standing invitation for future UN special procedures requests (Australia); 186.73. Take the necessary concrete steps to facilitate a visit by the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights as soon as possible (Austria); Organize a visit of the High Commissioner in the coming future (Slovakia); Facilitate the visits of the UN High Commissioner and the special procedures, including to Tibetan and Uighur areas (Switzerland); 186.74. Pursue its policies in favour of the vulnerable strata of society (Togo); 186.75. Continue to strengthen its efforts to protect the rights of vulnerable groups with a particular focus on narrowing the gaps between the different regions (Bhutan); 186.76. Continue the efforts aimed at fighting against poverty and discrimination of the most vulnerable groups (Ecuador); 186.77. Continue to protect the rights of children (Mauritius); 186.78. Further enhance the rights of children, especially orphaned and disabled children, children affected by HIV/AIDS and children from poor households (South Africa); 186.79. Continue its efforts to successfully achieve the Child Development Plan 2011-2020 set by the State Council in 2011 (United Arab Emirates); 186.80. Continue its effort to promote and protect the rights of children including further action against the abduction, maltreatment and abandonment of children (Ethiopia); 186.81. Increase the number of institutions providing professional services for the upbringing and protection of orphans, protection of homeless children and the rehabilitation of children with disabilities (Kuwait); 186.82. Increase efforts to gather data on child abuse with the aim of supporting policy formulation process (Italy); 186.83. Create national and local-level systems to protect children from all forms of exploitation, including child labour (Finland); 186.84 Fully protect the legitimate rights and interests of ethnic minorities, women, children, the elderly and disabled persons (Central African Republic); 186.85. Inscribe the legal definition of discrimination in Chinese laws as a means to enhance Chinese efforts in this regard (Portugal); 186.86. Ensure proper registration of all boys and girls born in China in order to protect their rights to legal personality and equality before the law (Mexico); 186.87. Give priority to protecting the rights of girl children by ensuring that all girls are registered at birth, implement wide awareness raising campaigns on the human rights of girls and promote their education (Slovenia); 186.88. Improve the collection and publishing of gender-specific data in the fields of economic and social development (State of Palestine); 186.89. Establish anti-discrimination laws and regulations to ensure that lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons enjoy equal treatment, including at schools and in the workplace (Ireland); 186.90. Include a prohibition of discrimination of any kind, including discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity, ethnicity, religion and infection with HIV, in labour and employment law in line with international standards (Netherlands); 186.91. Take further measures to promote gender equality and eradicate stereotypes regarding the roles and responsibilities of women in society (Republic of Moldova); 186.92. Undertake further efforts to eliminate gender discrimination in the labour market and guarantee equal pay for equal work (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 186.93. Further expand and consolidate achievements made in promoting women’s rights and well-being in tandem with its policy and practice of protecting and promoting human dignity (Eritrea); 186.94. Implement measures to address the sex ratio imbalance in its population given the harm that occurs when many women and girls are missing, and put in place safeguards that ensure policies related to the family are consent-based (Canada); 186.95. Adopt a comprehensive law for combatting domestic violence (Republic of Moldova); 186.96. Continue to adopt appropriate measures in combating the trafficking of human beings (Romania); 186.97. Combat the crimes of abduction of and trafficking in women, provide women victims with physical and psychological rehabilitation services with a view to their integration into the society, continue improving the pension system covering urban and rural areas (Mali); 186.98. Review its sentencing policy for perpetrators of human trafficking and strengthen assistance measures to victims (Botswana); 186.99. Exert more efforts and take measures to promote women’s rights and protection in accordance to traditional Chinese norms and values, to achieve more progress in various fields (Oman); 186.100. Introduce a comprehensive and inclusive national plan of action to guarantee the rights of persons with disabilities, in accordance with international human rights law (Brazil); 186.101. Increase efforts to combat the stigma associated with boys and girls with disabilities and review the family planning policy with the aim of combatting the deep causes of abandonment of boys and girls with disabilities as well as to provide sufficient community services and assistance in rural regions (Uruguay); 186.102. Continue actions to address the needs of persons with disabilities (Senegal);  186.103. Introduce policies oriented towards a better inclusion of all persons with disabilities in all areas of society, in particular children (Costa Rica); 186.104. Continue with efforts to combat discrimination and abandonment of children with disabilities (Argentina); 186.105. Continue to implement policies and programmes aimed at fulfilling the interests of the disabled (Zimbabwe); 186.106. Continue its ongoing efforts to protect the rights of persons with disabilities through relevant laws and regulations (Brunei Darussalam); 186.107. Continue reform towards eventual abolition of the death penalty, including greater transparency around its use (New Zealand); Continue towards the abolition of death penalty (Rwanda); Continue to work towards the full abolition of death penalty and consider adopting an immediate de facto moratorium (Portugal); Consider the abolition of the death penalty in its legal system (Argentina) ;Work towards abolition of the death penalty (Australia); Proceed to the establishment of a moratorium on the application of the death penalty as a first step to its definitive abolition (Spain); 186.108. Publish the figures regarding death sentences and executions (Italy); Publicize the statistics on executions (Switzerland);Publish official statistics on the application of the death penalty, guarantee the right to a fair defence, and introduce a procedure for pardon petitions with a view to a moratorium on execution (France); Publish or make available precise information on the identity and number of the individuals currently awaiting execution and of those who were executed in the past year (Belgium); 186.109. Further reduce the offences punishable by death penalty (Italy); Make further progress in the reduction of the scope of capital offences in Chinese legislation (Bulgaria);Further reduce the number of crimes carrying the death penalty and consider a moratorium and eventual abolition (Germany); Continue to reduce the offences punishable by the death penalty (Belgium);  186.110. Continue to strictly observe the stipulations on evidence used to examine and decide on cases of the death penalty and adopt stricter standards in this regard (Algeria); 186.111. Continue observing its national legal safeguards surrounding the application of death penalty as one of the legitimate tools of criminal justice (Egypt); 186.112. Abolish the death penalty (Namibia); 186.113. Establish a moratorium on the death penalty as a first step towards abolition of the death penalty (Slovenia);  186.114. Consider a moratorium on the death penalty (Chile); 186.115. End the use of harassment, detention, arrest, and extralegal measures such as enforced disappearance to control and silence human rights activists as well as their family members and friends (United States of America); 186.116. Abolish all forms of arbitrary and extra-judicial detention (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 186.117. Abolish Re-education through Labour, prevent torture, and immediately inform relatives about arrests and effective legal representation (Germany); Abolish the system of re-education through labour (France); 186.118. Ensure that any reformed prison or compulsory care system meets international human rights standards, and abolish system of arbitrary detention, including Re-Education Through Labour (Sweden); 186.119. Improve further means and methods for vocational education of persons in prison in order to assist in their later integration into the society (Belarus); 186.120. Publish a detailed plan for the abolition of re-education camps through labour, re-stating the timeframe of this welcomed measure (Belgium); 186.121. Continue to push forward the reform on re-education through labour according to China’s national conditions and timetable (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 186.122. Release all people in administrative detention for political reasons including bishops, priests, artists, reporters, dissidents, people working to advance human rights, and their family members, and eliminate extra-judicial measures like forced disappearances (Canada); 186.123. Adjust and specify the applicable conditions and stipulations for the adoption of compulsory measures such as arrest, release on bail pending trial and residential surveillance (Timor-Leste); 186.124. Continue its efforts to strengthen the judicial system to enhance public security and the rule of law (Singapore); 186.125. Continue implementation of the comprehensive judicial reform which ensures that the judicial authorities exercise their powers in accordance with the law (Kyrgyzstan); 186.126. Continue with judicial reforms with a view to strengthening human rights safeguards (Nigeria); 186.127. Reform its administrative justice system, including by eliminating “reeducation through labour”, and ratify the ICCPR (United States of America); 186.128. Increase judicial transparency in the use of the death penalty (Norway); 186.129. Further improve the regulatory framework for lawyers conducive to the unhindered exercise of their profession, and continue to harmonize laws and regulations with international standards (Hungary); 186.130. Further strengthen the conditions in which lawyers exercise their functions (Cape Verde); 186.131. Guarantee access to prompt and effective investigation by an independent and impartial body for defence lawyers alleging that their access to their clients has been unlawfully obstructed (Finland); Take steps to ensure lawyers and individuals working to advance human rights can practice their profession freely, including by promptly investigating allegations of violence and intimidation impeding their work (Canada); 186.132. .Inform the suspects of their rights and obligations in a timely manner in accordance with the law, as well as to actively create conditions for lawyers to get involved in a lawsuit from the stage of criminal investigation (Timor-Leste); 186.133. Accelerate reform of the administrative justice system so that all persons have access to legal procedures of appeal (Canada); 186.134. Continue to guarantee young people the access to legal assistance in conformity with the law (Djibouti); 186.135. Maintain its effective protection for the family as the fundamental and natural unit of society (Egypt); 186.136. Expedite legal and institutional reforms to fully protect in law and in practice freedom of expression, association and assembly, and religion and belief (Australia); 186.137. Stop all criminal prosecutions, arrests and all other forms of intimidation of individuals as a result of  the peaceful exercise of their rights to freedom of expression, freedom of association, and assembly, or freedom of religion and belief (Spain); 186.138. Take the necessary measures to ensure that the rights to freedom of religion, culture and expression are fully observed and protected in every administrative entity of China (Poland); 186.139. Continue promoting the freedom of religious belief and safeguarding social and religious harmony among its people (Malaysia); 186.140. Take effective measures to protect the right to freedom of religion or belief (Austria); 186.141. Guarantees freedom of religion in respect of national unity and the territorial integrity of the country (Comoros); 186.142. Stop the prosecution and persecution of people for the practice of their religion or belief including Catholics, other Christians, Tibetans, Uyghurs, and Falun Gong, and set a date for the visit of the Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief (Canada); 186.143. Consider possible revision of its legislation on administrative restrictions in order to provide a better protection of freedom of religion or belief (Italy); 186.144. Strengthen the human rights framework to ensure religious freedoms (Namibia); 186.145. Improve the organization and management of, and service to pilgrimage to Saudi Arabia to provide convenience and guarantee for Muslims to complete their pilgrimage smoothly (Saudi Arabia); 186.146. Strengthen legislation to prevent the unlawful from undermining other people's interests in the name of human rights defenders (Saudi Arabia); 186.147. Adopt further measures to firmly crack down on cult organizations to safeguard freedom of worship and the normal religious order (Uganda); 186.148. Intensify efforts to facilitate the participation of NGOs, academic institutions and the media in safeguarding human rights (Nigeria); 186.149. Facilitate the development, in law and practice, of a safe and enabling environment in which both civil society and human rights defenders can operate free from fear, hindrance and insecurity (Ireland); 186.150. Allow national and international NGOs to play a full and active role in promoting and protecting human rights, specifically by expanding registration to all categories of NGOs and social organizations in China and by expanding their freedom to operate effectively (Netherlands); 186.151. Remove restrictions on freedom of information and expression that are not in accordance with international human rights law—established by law, and deemed necessary and proportionate (Sweden); Take the necessary measures to eliminate restrictions on the freedom of expression, including those imposed to national and international journalists (Costa Rica); Repeal any unreasonable restrictions on freedom of expression particularly for the media (Poland); 186.152. Urgently release those being held in detention or imprisonment for exercising their right to freedom of expression (Sweden); 186.153. Ensure that all laws, regulations and judicial interpretations comply with the Constitution and the ICCPR to ensure that the constitutionally provided right to freedom of expression is fulfilled (Denmark); 186.154. Make further efforts towards safeguarding the freedom of expression of all citizens (Norway); 186.155. Reform legislation and law enforcement in order to ensure freedom of opinion and expression, including on the internet (Germany); 186.156. Take effective measures to guarantee the freedom of expression and the media through amending existing laws and practices, including its State Secrets Law, and to release all human rights defenders and journalists (Czech Republic); 186.157. Strengthen the measures aimed at guaranteeing freedom of expression and freedom of the press (Côte d’Ivoire); 186.158. Ensure that proper investigations are conducted in all cases of attacks on journalists, media workers and human rights defenders (Poland); 186.159. Remove all the obstacles to freedom of information on the Internet, and guarantee freedom of expression, assembly and association for all (France); 186.160. Take steps that all persons including bloggers, journalists and human rights defenders can freely exercise their right to freedom of expression, online as well as offline, without fear from censorship or persecution (Austria); 186.161. Undertake measures enabling unrestricted use of Internet to all members of the society (Estonia); 186.162. Further develop and manage internet and communications sectors, ensuring the legitimate rights and interests of ordinary people enjoying safe and secure internet usage (Viet Nam); 186.163. Strengthen efforts to promote orderly development of Internet and protect the legitimate rights and interests of ordinary people while reinforcing the legislation on Internet information protection and supervision (Bangladesh); 186.164. Investigate activities of fabrication and dissemination of false information, and take measures with regard to persons engaged in illegal activities through Internet (Cuba); 186.165. Strengthen institutional guarantees for the legitimate rights and interests of news agencies and journalists (Myanmar); 186.166. Continue the spread of internet connections throughout the rural areas (Ethiopia); 186.167. Refrain from impeding civil society and respect its international obligations on the right to freedom of peaceful assembly (Germany); 186.168. Expand channels and mechanism of direct dialogue between the Government and the population (Russian Federation); 186.169. Continue strengthening the protection and promotion of the right of all citizens to publicly express their beliefs and opinions (Chile); 186.170. Increase transparency of its traditional and social media by guaranteeing the rights of Chinese citizens to freely critique any state organ or functionary (Australia); 186.171. Make efforts to ensure the participation of women in public affairs especially in Village Committees (India); 186.172. Ensure the implementation of the Electoral Law (Uganda); 186.173. Further guarantee citizens’ right to express themselves, to vote and to be elected (Uganda); 186.174. Increase its effort to address the issues of rural and urban migrant workers and their families in a more effective way (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 186.175. Strengthen efforts to promote and protect the rights of people living in rural areas and the situation of rural migrant workers (State of Palestine); 186.176. Continue to use the platform of All-China Federation of Trade Unions to safeguard the rights of employees to get employed, paid and social security (Myanmar); 186.177. Continue its efforts to enhance labour rights and ensure the safety of workers, including giving full legislative expression of the principle of equal remuneration for men and women for work of equal value (Iceland); 186.178. Implement the employment priority strategy and ensure equal employment opportunities to urban and rural residents (Algeria); 186.179. Continue adopting a job friendly policy and ensuring equal employment opportunities for urban and rural residents (Bulgaria); 186.180. Further improve unemployment insurance and elevate the level of unified planning for unemployment insurance funds (Angola); 186.181. Work out methods for implementing the relevant regulations on social security for religious staff (Jordan); 186.182. Continue to improve all social security system for all its elderly population (Brunei Darussalam); 186.183. Continue the policy of strengthening guarantees of social and economic rights of citizens, in particular in the area of education, health care, social protection and labour, and give special attention to the vulnerable groups such as children, persons with disabilities and national minorities (Russian Federation); 186.184. Continue to improve living conditions in rural areas through the realization of social infrastructures and guaranteeing better services for its population (Niger); 186.185. Continue to provide comprehensive protection to citizens’ economic, social and cultural rights (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 186.186. Continue its efforts in implementing a social security system accessible to urban and rural residents (Congo); 186.187. Continue its measures in the field of social security and health (Azerbaijan); 186.188. Intensify its efforts to eradicate poverty and improve health care facilities for its people (Mauritius); 186.189. Redouble its efforts in implementing poverty alleviation projects and promoting the development of impoverished areas (Malaysia); 186.190. Maintain and strengthen the achievements made in poverty elimination and further consolidate its continued efforts by giving focus to its integrated rural development schemes and in line with its priority and experience to promote the right to development (Eritrea); 186.191. Continue its national policy aimed at improving the access of citizens to subsistence and to development, and improve continuously the standard of living of the population according to the national conditions of China (Morocco); 186.192. Continue to increase the investment in poverty alleviation and gradually raise the standards for poverty alleviation, and thereby reduce the number of impoverished population (Mozambique); 186.193. Continue its activities in bridging the gap in economic and social development between rural and urban areas and among geographical regions, as well as its efforts to eradicate poverty through the implementation of alleviation projects and the employment strategy (Serbia); 186.194. Continue efforts in implementation of the country’s Plans of Action in particular those relating to the safeguard of the economic, social and cultural rights of the people, including those of the most vulnerable ones and disadvantaged groups (Cambodia); 186.195. Ensure the safety of drinking water by promoting the construction of a monitoring network for the safety of drinking water (Mozambique); 186.196. Continue advancing the right to housing for farmers and herdsmen (Nepal); 186.197. Continue advancing the construction of permanent houses for farmers and herdsmen in the region on a voluntary basis and in their real needs (Turkmenistan); 186.198. Undertake further efforts to promote the tasks of all government departments that provide public services (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 186.199. Prevent and treat diseases and popularize knowledge in the prevention and treatment of chronic diseases (Angola); 186.200. Create a national public service network covering sports for both the urban and rural areas (Chad); 186.201. Further guarantee children’s right to health and continue the trend to constantly reduce the mortality rate for children under five years of age (Indonesia); 186.202. Improve the quality of maternity services in urban and rural areas, increase the proportion of children born in hospitals and reduce the child mortality rate (Morocco); 186.203. Improve maternity care services especially in rural areas and work to increase the percentage of women who give birth in hospitals and to decrease maternal mortality rate during birth (Qatar);  186.204. Continue its efforts in improving health conditions of the people with a view to further reducing maternal and infant mortality, including through awareness-raising (Sri Lanka); 186.205. Strengthen the implementation of compulsory education for nine years (Chad); 186.206. Continue to invest and take appropriate measures to ensure that all school age children enjoy fully the right to education (Portugal); 186.207. Continue to improve its education system and access to quality education for its people (Singapore); 186.208. Intensify efforts in consolidating the right of education to further raise the level of compulsory education as consolidations as the advance it has made in the human capital formation (Eritrea); 186.209. Increase the provision of resources for education establishments in remote and rural areas, as well as regions inhabited by ethnic minorities (Russian Federation); 186.210. Improve access to education for disadvantaged people (Senegal); 
186.211. Guarantee the right to education for children of migrant workers (Chad); 186.212. Adopt further measures to fully ensure the right to education of children accompanying rural workers migrating to urban areas (Italy); 186.213. Continue to attach great importance to safeguarding the compulsory education rights of children accompanying rural migrant workers (Lesotho); 186.214. Continue to make efforts to promote the right to education for children of migrant workers from rural areas (Republic of Korea); 186.215. Allocate more educational resources to central and western regions, rural areas, remote and border areas, and in ethnic minority areas (South Sudan); 186.216. Better the conditions of urban schools, especially in the poor neighbourhoods (South Sudan); 186.217. Raise the education level of the disabled and make sure that school-age disabled children generally receive compulsory education (Jordan); 186.218. Continue to extend its State scholarship programmes to ensure that students do not drop out of school because of poverty (Zimbabwe); 186.219. Continue pursuing measures and policy aimed at ensuring the rights of ethnic minorities’ learning, writing and the development of their own languages according to the relevant laws (Cambodia); 186.220. Exert more efforts to protect cultures, especially those of ethnic minorities, and to promote the protection of cultural relics (Iraq); 186.221. Make further efforts for securing all human rights, including cultural rights of minorities (Japan); 186.222. Take further legislative and practical measures to allow ethnic minorities to preserve their cultural identity, to fully exercise their human rights and to ensure their participation in decision-making, in accordance with the Chinese Constitution (Austria); 186.223. Continue to guarantee the rights of ethnic minorities on an equal footing and in accordance with the law (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 186.224. Strengthen protection of ethnic minorities’ religious, socio-economic and political rights, ensuring reports of violations are promptly and transparently investigated (Australia); 186.225. Permanently lift restrictions on access to minority areas (Australia); 186.226. Continue to promote economic development in ethnic minority regions and strengthen their capacity for development (India); 186.227. Continue promoting economic development in all regions and strengthening their self-development capacity (Nepal); 186.228. Continue to carry out the system of regional autonomy in ethnic areas and give more favourable conditions to ethnic minorities for participating in the fields of politics, economy and culture (Viet Nam); 186.229. Continue carrying out the system of regional autonomy in the ethnic minorities areas and give a more special treatment to ethnic minorities in politics, the economy, culture and education (Cuba); 186.230. Take urgent steps to fully respect the rights of ethnic minorities, including peaceful political and religious practices and expressions of cultural identity (Sweden); 186.231. Continue measures to further economic and social development of Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, to protect the right to freedom of religion and belief as well as to maintain stability in this autonomous region. (Tajikistan); 186.232. Ensure democratic participation of members of all ethnic minorities and allow unhindered access to all minority areas, including Tibet (Germany); 186.233. Protect ethnic and religious minorities, including Tibetans and Uyghurs, stop all disproportionate policies against them, while addressing their discontent in a non-violent, dialogical way (Czech Republic); 186.234. Protect the rights of ethnic minority groups, including Tibetans, Uighurs, and Mongolians, in accordance with China’s Constitution and international human rights commitments (United States of America); 186.235. In light of concerns about the situation of human rights in Xinjiang and Tibet, respond to the invitation addressed to the Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief to visit these regions (France); 186.236. Resume the two-way dialogue in Tibet (New Zealand); 186.237. Strengthening of efforts to take action against criminals who instigate, intimidate or help others to commit self-immolations (Pakistan); 186.238. Step up measures to bring to justice persons who instigate others to commit acts of self-immolation (Uzbekistan); 186.239. Continue to counter the East Turkistan terrorist organizations to prevent their violent activities, and assist the ordinary people being deceived and victimized by these organizations to resume their normal lives (Pakistan);  186.240. Continue to counter terrorist and ethnic separatist activities undertaken by certain individuals and groups (Sri Lanka); 186.241. Protect North Korean refugees in accordance with international law, honouring the principle of non-refoulement (Czech Republic); 186.242. Accept the recommendations of UNHCR on refugee issues including the adoption of national asylum legislation (Republic of Korea); 186.243. Provide adequate protection to asylum seekers and cross-border refugees including especially those from neighbouring countries, in accordance with humanitarian considerations and relevant international norms such as the principle of non-refoulement (Republic of Korea); 186.244. Continue promoting the right to development (Namibia); 186.245. Give priority to the right of people to development and to continue efforts to uplift the standard of living of the people in the framework of China’s efforts to protect and promote human rights (Yemen); 186.246. Continue efforts in environmental protection and in improving living conditions (Belarus); 186.247. Strengthen the actions aimed at guaranteeing the enjoyment of the most fundamental rights and the access to the basic infrastructures in the most remote areas (Côte d’Ivoire); 186.248. Continue its international cooperation to contribute to the development of the world economy (Bangladesh); 186.249. Strengthen standing efforts aiming at the realization of the right to development especially through sharing experiences and best practices with other developing countries (Lebanon); 186.250. Strengthen international cooperation with other countries on poverty reduction, the realization of the MDGs and good governance (South Africa); 186.251. Develop further its bilateral and multilateral cooperation and exchanges, notably in the area of economic, social and cultural rights (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 186.252. Develop programme for sharing of its experiences in addressing the right to development with African countries in the context of the Forum on China-Africa cooperation (Sierra Leone). 187. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex 
[English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of China was headed by H. E. Mr. WU Hailong, Special Envoy of Ministry of Foreign Affairs of China, and composed of the following members: Deputy Heads of Delegation • H.E. Mr. WU Haitao, Ambassador, Charge d’Affaires a.i. of Permanent Mission of China to the UNOG; • Mr.	 LI Junhua, Director-General, Department of International Organizations and Conferences, MFA; • Mr. LAU Kong Wah, Under Secretary for Constitutional and Mainland Affairs, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR); • Ms. CHU Lam Lam, Director, Law Reform and International Law Bureau, Macau Special Administrative Region (MCSAR). Members of Delegation • Mr. YU Shukun, Minister Counsellor, Permanent Mission of China to the UNOG; • Mr. QIAN Bo, Deputy Director-General, Department of International Organizations and Conferences, MFA; • Mr. MIAO Youshui, Deputy Presiding Judge, Second Criminal Division, Supreme People’s Court; • Ms. SUI Qing, Deputy Director-General, Department of Supervision, State Ethnic Affairs Commission; • Ms. XIAO Hong, Deputy Director-General, Department of Foreign Affairs, State Administration for Religious Affairs; • Mr. GUO Shousong, Deputy Director-General, Reception Department, State Bureau for Letters and Calls; • Mr. CHEN Chuandong, Counsellor, Permanent Mission of China to the UNOG; • Mr. YAO Shaojun, 	Director, Department of International Organizations and Conferences, MFA; • Mr. LIU Peng, Director, Seventh Department, United Front Work Department of CPC Central Committee; • Mr. GU Tinghai, Director, General Office, Ministry of Justice; • Ms. LUO Xin, Director, Department of International Cooperation, Ministry of Civil Affairs; • Mr. GONG Xiangguang, Director, Department of Law and Legislation, National Health and Family Planning Commission; • Mr. HE Lianhui, Director, General Office, National 	Working Committee on Children and Women under the State Council; • Mr. JIANG Yingfeng, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of China to the UNOG; • Ms. YOU Jia, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of China to the UNOG; • Ms. FAN Qin, First Secretary, Department of Translation and Interpretation, MFA; • Mr. ZHAN Shuiqing, Director, General Office, Central Leading Group for Judicial System Reform; • Mr. ZHU Wenqi, Director, Department of Real Estate Market Supervision, Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural Development; • Mr. GU Shengkai, Director, Seventh Department, State Council Information Office; • Ms. LIN Wenhua, Deputy Director, Department of Treaty and Law, MFA; • Ms. YAO Linna, Deputy Director, Department of External Security Affairs, MFA, • Ms. WANG Qi, Deputy Director, Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Public Security; • Mr. ZHENG Zhenjiang, Deputy Director, Department of Policy and Regulation, Ministry of Education; • Ms. LI Jingyun, Deputy Director, Department of Policy and Regulation, Ministry of Environmental Protection; • Ms. DUAN Xiaolei, Senior Liaison Officer, Secretariat, State Council Working Committee on Disability; • Ms. HOU Pei, Third Secretary, Permanent Mission of China to the UNOG; • Mr. LI	 Sui, Third Secretary, Department of International Organizations and Conferences, MFA; • Ms. CHEN Can, Third Secretary, Department of International Organizations and Conferences, MFA; • Ms. WANG Yi, Third Secretary, Permanent Mission of China to the United Nations Office at Geneva; • Mr. LI Bingzhuo, Attaché, Permanent Mission of China to the UNOG; • Mr. HAN Qing, Attaché, Permanent Mission of China to the United Nations; • Ms. CHEUNG Mei Chu Doris, Deputy Secretary for Labour and Welfare, HKSAR; • Mrs. NG KIANG Mei Nei Millie, Principal Assistant Secretary for Security, HKSAR; • Mr. KAN Ka Fai, Senior Assistant Solicitor General, HKSAR; • Ms. CHAN Tsz Ki, Assistant Secretary for Constitutional and Mainland Affairs, HKSAR; • Mr. ZHU Lin, 	Advisor, Office of the Secretary for Administration and Justice, MCSAR; • Ms. Ilda Cristina Fernandes De Sousa FERREIRA, Advisor, Office of the Secretary for Security, MCSAR; • Mr. LONG Kong Lo, Director, Social Welfare Bureau, MCSAR; • Mr. PUI Sin Fat, Legal Advisor, Cabinet of the Commissioner Against Corruption, MCSAR. 