  United Nations  A/HRC/24/6     General Assembly  Distr.: General 4 July 2013  Original: English  Human Rights Council Twenty-fourth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   Colombia Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–114 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–20 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  21–114 5  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  115–119 13  III. Voluntary pledges and commitments ......................................................................  120–126 24  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  25 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its sixteenth session from 22 April to 3 May 2013. The review of Colombia was held at the 4th meeting on 23 April 2013. The delegation of Colombia was headed by Vice-President Angelino Garzón. At its 10th meeting, held on 26 April 2013, the Working Group adopted the report on Colombia. 2. On 14 January 2013, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Colombia: Ecuador, Gabon and India. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Colombia:  (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/COL/1);  (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/COL/2);  (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/COL/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Liechtenstein, Mexico, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Colombia through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR).  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The Vice-President of Colombia began his presentation by noting that the Government attended the second UPR review to report on the follow-up to the commitments made and recommendations received in December 2008. In response to recommendations regarding peace, the Government recognized the existence of an internal armed conflict and promoted the adoption of the Victims and Land Restitution Law. With the help of Norway and Cuba and the accompaniment of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Chile, President Santos had initiated a dialogue with representatives of the guerrilla army of the FARC [Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia – People’s Army]. The Government had the will to pursue dialogue; however, a will on the part of the FARC was also necessary. 6. The Government respected and protected the work of human rights defenders, including trade union leaders, as a State policy. The mechanisms of protection of human rights defenders, trade union leaders, victims of the armed conflict, communities of African descent, indigenous peoples, members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) community and women had improved. 7. At the same time, the delegation recognized that there were still human rights challenges to overcome, such as lack of social equality, impunity, prison overcrowding, the need for greater protection for some human rights defenders and the signature of a peace agreement. 8. The Vice-President announced that the Government had taken a unilateral decision to extend for three years the mandate of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in Colombia. Also, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights had taken the decision to remove Colombia from the list of countries under permanent observation. 9. Regarding indigenous peoples, for the first time ethnic minorities had been consulted on three instruments that guaranteed their rights: the National Development Plan, the national guarantee programme and the legislation regarding reparation and land restitution. Also, the Government had defined specific policies guaranteeing the rights of populations of African descent to a collective territory, self-government and autonomy in their decisions, as well as on specific health and education policies. The signing of the law on combating all forms of discrimination was just one example. 10. One of the promoters of International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention No. 169, Colombia has been a pioneer in the right to prior consultation. In that connection, the Government had agreed with the OHCHR office in Colombia the establishment of a working group for the development of good practices on prior consultation. 11. For his part, the Deputy Attorney General stated that Colombia had the will and capacity to investigate and punish human rights violations. Its procedures were being strengthened to follow the model of international tribunals. Moreover, the International Criminal Court had considered the Attorney General’s Office as an example of positive complementarity. The strategy of investigating and prosecuting serious human rights violations had been changing and a new Unit of Analysis and Contexts had been established. 12. The security effort in the last decade had transformed the country. Colombians were more protected and lived more peacefully. A total of 87 per cent of the municipalities, comprising 86 per cent of the population, had not suffered a single act of terrorism in 2012. During the last decade, the homicide rate had been reduced by half and kidnappings by 95 per cent. The delegation highlighted the policy that favored demobilization and captures over deaths in combat. 13. Regarding military justice, Congress passed a constitutional amendment that excluded crimes against humanity, genocide, enforced disappearances, extrajudicial executions, sexual violence, torture and forced displacement from its jurisdiction and ordered that military justice should be independent, impartial and autonomous. The essence of the reform would enter into force only after Congress had deliberated on the law regulating the reform and once the Constitutional Court had reviewed the law. 14. Regarding the administration of justice, the delegation explained that the State had committed to allocating US$ 1.11 billion over the next four years for the implementation of the new oral system, the promotion of the independence of the judiciary and the acquisition of new technologies for the judicial process. 15. The delegation acknowledged that Colombia occupied the eighth place in Latin America in terms of prison overcrowding. To address this problem, the Government was implementing a plan to increase the capacity of prisons by 40 per cent over the next four years. 16. The core of the transitional justice system in Colombia was the rights of victims and the rights to truth, justice and reparation. The Victims and Land Restitution law was one of the tools for transitional justice. 17. Colombia had received recommendations requesting a reparations programme, even though the conflict had not ended. In response, a victims reparations unit, the Land Restitution Unit and the Center for Historical Memory had been established. Those three institutions employed more than 2,000 officers trained to serve victims across the country with dignity and respect. 18. In one year of enforcement of the reparation measures, about 158,000 victims had been indemnified and over 100,000 victims had received a reparation plan. In the collective dimension, consultations with indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities were ongoing regarding over 70 processes of redress and safe and voluntary return with dignity. 19. The victims’ policy could currently rely on accurate data. More than 1,000 institutions exchanged disaggregated information, and more than 5 million victims, half of them women, were registered. 20. Colombia had allocated US$ 30 billion to implement this policy over the next 10 years.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 21. During the interactive dialogue, 76 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 22. Pakistan appreciated the follow-up taken after the review of Colombia in 2008 and the engagement with stakeholders and the international community. It hoped that the road map for a dialogue with the FARC would lead to an agreement ending the armed conflict. Pakistan made recommendations. 23. Panama acknowledged the efforts of Colombia manifested in the Victims and Land Restitution Law, one of the most important steps to ensure the right to truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of non-repetition. It made recommendations. 24. Paraguay welcomed the adoption of the law on victims and land restitution, the establishment of a follow-up mechanism to the UPR and the creation of a national human rights system. Paraguay made a recommendation. 25. Peru noted the establishment of the conference and the national human rights system and the formulation of the public policy on human rights and international humanitarian law. It highlighted measures to reduce poverty, the adoption of the Victims and Land Restitution Law, and the beginning of a dialogue to end the armed conflict. Peru made recommendations. 26. Cuba commended Colombia for its efforts and results in the implementation of accepted UPR recommendations. It highlighted the implementation of the National Development Plan, and measures to reduce poverty and to achieve a more equal and fair society. Cuba made recommendations. 27. Poland asked about measures planned by Colombia to remedy the situation regarding extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions referred to in the Special Rapporteur’s report. Poland appreciated progress in preventing the recruitment of children by non-State armed groups, but noted the widespread use of children for intelligence purposes. It made recommendations. 28. Portugal welcomed the process for the elaboration of the national report. It referred to concerns expressed by various mechanisms over the possible implication of the new Constitutional reform that would extend the powers of military and police tribunals. Portugal made recommendations. 29. The Republic of Korea welcomed efforts to promote and protect human rights since the first UPR for Colombia. It highlighted the strengthening of human rights protection mechanisms and the creation of institutional structures, such as the National Protection Unit. It made recommendations. 30. Romania congratulated Colombia for its achievements in recent years. It expressed appreciation for work of the authorities in ensuring the improvement of the situation of children, particularly of those most affected by the conflict. It made a recommendation. 31. The Russian Federation welcomed steps taken by Colombia to settle the internal conflict and the entering into force in 2012 of the law to compensate victims, and expressed hope that the law would be fully implemented. It made recommendations. 32. Senegal noted the implementation of the 2010-2014 National Development Plan, the strengthening of programmes on poverty reduction and food security as well as free public education at the primary and secondary levels. It made recommendations. 33. Serbia referred to positive results attained by Colombia in recent years. It highlighted, in particular, efforts to combat corruption, to fight against recruitment of children, to implement the National Development Plan and to reduce poverty. Serbia made recommendations. 34. Singapore noted the Government’s emphasis on eradicating poverty and its commitment to reduce the proportion of its population living in extreme poverty to 8.5 per cent by 2015. It noted the efforts in combating violence and maintaining public order, including tackling armed criminal gangs. Singapore made recommendations. 35. Slovakia welcomed the peace process initiated in 2012 and the adoption of the act concerning victims of enforced disappearance. It commended Colombia for its mid-term reporting on the UPR recommendations and the support extended to the OHCHR country office. Slovakia made recommendations. 36. Slovenia welcomed the establishment of the National System for Human Rights and International Humanitarian Law, the adoption of the Anti-Discrimination Act, and the National Strategy to Combat Human Trafficking. It was concerned by threats against human rights defenders, particularly at rural and grassroots levels. It made recommendations. 37. South Africa commended Colombia for progress made in the enhancement of human rights through the National Development Plan. It expressed concern at the increase in sexual violence against women in recent years, mainly related to the internal armed conflict. It made a recommendation. 38. Spain congratulated Colombia for its achievements, including the follow-up mechanism to monitor the implementation of recommendations. The Victims and Land Restitution Law was noted as important for the peace process. Spain was concerned by the situation of violence against women. It made recommendations. 39. Sri Lanka acknowledged the continuous follow-up of the UPR recommendations and commitments. It took special note of the implementation of the National Development Plan and the decrease, nationally, in the rates of poverty and extreme poverty. It noted the initiatives to ensure the right to education at different levels. Sri Lanka made recommendations. 40. The State of Palestine praised the national programme of literacy and intermediate education for young people and adults. It noted the creation of a National Policy for Gender Equality for Women. It made recommendations. 41. Sweden recognized the commitment of Colombia to extend the mandate of the OHCHR country office and asked whether the extension would include all aspects of the current mandate. It expressed concern about possible effects of the constitutional reform of military jurisdiction. Sweden made recommendations. 42. Switzerland noted with satisfaction the follow-up on its recommendations. It welcomed the measures taken to establish a constructive dialogue with the civil society. It made recommendations. 43. Thailand welcomed the peace talks and the commitment of Colombia to guarantee the rights of victims of the conflict to truth, justice, reparations and non-repetition. It remained concerned by reports of continued expansion of illegal armed groups following the demobilization of paramilitary groups. Thailand made recommendations. 44. Trinidad and Tobago recognized the Government’s commitment to stabilize the situation after the announcement of a peace process with the FARC. It urged Colombia to continue its engagement against human trafficking. It noted and welcomed the ratification by Colombia of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. It made recommendations. 45. Tunisia highlighted the measures on the rights of victims of the conflict. It encouraged Colombia to ensure a favourable environment for human rights defenders and journalists and to rapidly put into practice the provisions of the newly ratified Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. It made a recommendation. 46. Turkey welcomed efforts to strengthen the rule of law and action against corruption. It commended Colombia for actions undertaken to guarantee gender equality and to empower women. Turkey made a recommendation. 47. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland commended the national guarantees process and plans for a national human rights policy. It strongly welcomed the peace negotiations with the FARC and supported the announcement of a mechanism for civil society participation. It made recommendations. 48. The United States of America commended Colombia for steps taken to reach a peaceful resolution of the long-standing conflict. It recognized recent public statements underscoring the commitment of Colombia to prevent impunity for human rights violations. It expressed concern about the inconsistent application of labour laws. The United States made recommendations. 49. Uruguay highlighted efforts to strengthen the rule of law, and those aimed at putting an end to the violence generated by the internal armed conflict, in particular steps taken within the framework of a peace process between the Government and the FARC. Uruguay made recommendations. 50. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela highlighted efforts by Colombia to reduce poverty and the implementation of programmes to protect elderly people without a pension or in extreme poverty. It noted the free primary and secondary education and the Government’s successful literacy programme. It made a recommendation. 51. Viet Nam noted with satisfaction that Colombia had made steady progress in the areas of socioeconomic development and human rights promotion and protection. It highlighted efforts and achievements made through the implementation of important national programmes and mechanisms. It made recommendations. 52. Algeria referred to efforts of Colombia to promote human rights despite challenges, as reflected in the national report. In particular, it underlined the National Development Plan for 2010-2014, which established human rights goals and pointed the way towards social inclusion and reconciliation. Algeria made recommendations. 53. Argentina welcomed the creation of the National System for Human Rights and International Humanitarian Law. It congratulated Colombia on ratifying the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. Argentina made recommendations. 54. Australia welcomed the approach of Colombia to enhancing institution-building and social mobilization in support of human rights. It welcomed the peace negotiations and the implementation of the Victims and Land Restitution law. It expressed concern about reports of members of illegal armed groups targeting women leaders and their families with sexual violence. Australia made recommendations. 55. Austria asked questions on recruitment of children by non-State armed groups, sexual violence and killings of activists. It expressed fear that the constitutional reform to expand the power of military or police tribunals to investigate and decide on human rights violations could result in a setback in the fight against impunity. Austria made recommendations. 56. Azerbaijan congratulated Colombia for its commitment to the United Nations system. Azerbaijan praised the country’s efforts to combat poverty and towards the universal advancement of education; and its effective measures for combating trafficking in persons and sexual violence. It made recommendations. 57. Belgium asked if the Colombian authorities envisaged recognizing the competence of the Committee on Forced Disappearances. It noted achievements in fighting violence against women, but remained concerned at the scope of sexual violence in the society. It made recommendations. 58. Brazil highlighted progress made in the reduction of poverty and extreme poverty. It noted firm steps taken by Colombia to address violence, and the adoption of the Victims and Land Restitution Law. Brazil indicated that it supported fully the peace process initiated recently. Brazil made recommendations. 59. Burundi welcomed the commitment of Colombia to combat poverty, its policy facilitating access to basic social services for indigenous populations and the setting up of free primary and secondary education. It encouraged the Government to continue its fight against sexual violence. It made a recommendation. 60. Cambodia welcomed the establishment of the National System for Human Rights and International Humanitarian Law and steps taken to address poverty. It also noted efforts to combat trafficking in persons. Cambodia made recommendations. 61. Canada asked about the status of the investigations and prosecutions of extrajudicial killings. It welcomed the ongoing efforts by Colombia to establish a common human rights and international humanitarian law agenda in Colombia. It made recommendations. 62. Chile noted with satisfaction that notwithstanding the complexities that the context of armed conflict presented, Colombia was working to strengthen the rule of law and democracy. It referred to efforts by Colombia to guarantee human rights and cooperate with the international and regional human rights systems. Chile made recommendations. 63. China commended progress made in protecting and promoting human rights, and the implementation of accepted recommendations. It noted achievements in poverty reduction, free access to education, improvements in the health care system, and protection of the rights of women, persons with disabilities, and indigenous populations. It made a recommendation.  64. The Congo highlighted the adoption of Law No. 1448 of 2011 for Victims and Land Restitution. It noted achievements in peacebuilding, eradication of extreme poverty, education and climate change. It made recommendations. 65. Costa Rica acknowledged efforts made by Colombia to guarantee human rights. It referred to the continuing practice of sexual violence as a war tactic and expressed concern about recurrent attacks against human rights defenders, indigenous and community leaders and lawyers. Costa Rica made recommendations. 66. The Philippines congratulated Colombia for its successful social programmes to reduce poverty, for the universal coverage of basic and secondary education and for its unified health care system. It welcomed the country’s determined efforts to include a human rights perspective in trade and business. The Philippines made recommendations. 67. Cyprus commended Colombia for its commitment to human rights and its pledge to end impunity for human rights abuses. It noted the strengthening of relationships between the Government and the civil society and human rights defenders. It urged closer attention to children’s rights. It made a recommendation. 68. The Czech Republic commended the enactment of the Victims and Land Restitution Law and encouraged Colombia to continue its efforts to promote and protect human rights and to strengthen the rule of law. It made recommendations. 69. The Dominican Republic welcomed the delegation and thanked Colombia for the presentation of its national report. The Dominican Republic made recommendations. 70. Ecuador recognized the progress and efforts made with regard to building lasting peace and a just society. The importance of the Victims and Land Restitution Law and efforts in the area of social and legal assistance for displaced persons were highlighted, as were achievements in poverty reduction. Ecuador made recommendations. 71. Egypt welcomed efforts made by Colombia to promote and protect human rights, including the strengthening of the areas and entities responsible for protecting the rights of minorities and the strengthening of judicial functions, social protection, security, housing and environment. Egypt made recommendations. 72. El Salvador highlighted progress made by Colombia in the fight against violence and in the protection of the population. It commended Colombia for the legislation to respond to the needs of victims, which reflected the commitment of Colombia to address impunity and support victims’ access to justice. 73. Finland asked how the Government ensured that perpetrators of human rights and international humanitarian law violations were prosecuted, and how it intended to ensure that human rights cases involving the security forces would not be tried by military courts. It asked how the issue of sexual violence would be addressed. Finland made recommendations. 74. France applauded the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, and commended progress on human rights and the launch of a peace process. France made recommendations. 75. Gabon welcomed the National Development Plan and noted efforts to strengthen the rule of law, and to combat corruption and land appropriation. Noting the provision of free primary and secondary education, it encouraged Colombia to continue extending education coverage in rural areas. Gabon made a recommendation. 76. Germany commended the Victims and Land Restitution Act and the human rights defenders protection mechanism. It noted continued attacks against human rights defenders and social leaders, particularly in rural areas, and expressed particular concern at the number of assassinations in 2012. Germany made recommendations. 77. Guatemala commended Colombia for its efforts to achieve peace and for the establishment of the National Protection Unit. It shared the satisfaction of the Secretary-General of the United Nations regarding the prevention of the recruitment of children. Guatemala made recommendations. 78. The Holy See welcomed reparations for victims of conflict and attention to the needs of indigenous peoples and of people of African descent. It urged continued efforts to combat corruption, drug trafficking, criminal gangs and impunity, to facilitate restitution processes, and to protect human life from conception to birth. It made recommendations. 79. Honduras recognized the legal and institutional framework providing access to truth, justice and reparations; transitional justice mechanisms; and legislation on peace and reparations. Concern was expressed at the trafficking of women and girls, although laudable efforts in that regard were noted. Honduras made a recommendation. 80. Hungary noted the visit by the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders, and stated that it would welcome further action to prevent violent attacks against human rights defenders. It asked for information on financial and institutional support for initiatives to raise awareness of forced recruitment among indigenous children and children of African descent. Hungary made recommendations. 81. Iceland asked how perpetrators were held accountable for crimes against trade unionists, journalists, judges, lawyers and human rights defenders, and how victims were protected. It asked how gender-based violence was addressed and investigated and welcomed the recognition of the rights of same-sex couples. Iceland made a recommendation. 82. Indonesia welcomed the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and various measures taken to advance the rights of persons with disabilities. It commended the Comprehensive National Strategy to Combat Trafficking in Persons and measures, notably a national policy, guaranteeing gender equality and empowering women. Indonesia made recommendations. 83. Ireland urged the inclusion of women and indigenous communities in peace talks, and expressed concern at the risks faced by those active in human rights, trade unions and land restitution. Impunity and the lack of access to justice for victims of gender-based violence should be addressed. Ireland made recommendations. 84. Italy commended the progress achieved in protecting human rights and the commitment to the reconciliation process. Colombia was encouraged to continue along that path. Italy made recommendations. 85. Kenya noted efforts to strengthen democracy, the rule of law and respect for human rights. It commended action on poverty, housing, education and health care, and encouraged the Government to continue to tackle the challenges faced by Colombian society, particularly the most vulnerable. 86. Kyrgyzstan acknowledged the achievements in human rights policies, as well as policies to strengthen democracy, State legitimacy and the rule of law, and to introduce zero tolerance for human rights violations. It welcomed the 2012 bill defining sexual violence as a crime against humanity. Kyrgyzstan made recommendations. 87. Malaysia noted that, despite continuing challenges, Colombia had strengthened the rule of law through legislative and public policy initiatives. It took positive note of steps to address its previous recommendations on organized crime, drug trafficking and trafficking in women and girls. Malaysia made recommendations. 88. Mexico supported the peace process with the FARC and welcomed cooperation with special procedures and OHCHR and ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. The willingness of Colombia to share its best practices in human rights was commended. Progress with regard to the national preventive mechanism was recognized. Mexico made recommendations. 89. Montenegro commended the general agreement to end the conflict and build lasting peace, as well as Government cooperation with human rights mechanisms. Noting the ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, it asked whether Colombia would recognize the competence of the Committee under article 31 of that Convention. Montenegro made recommendations. 90. Morocco welcomed the legal framework for peace and noted measures to combat violence and ensure reparations and the reintegration of victims. It welcomed the Legal Framework for Peace, allowing the beginning of the transitional extrajudicial justice process. It made a recommendation. 91. The Netherlands welcomed the measures taken to improve the situation of human rights and to address the causes of the conflict. While impunity remained a concern, particularly in the context of transitional justice and the expanded jurisdiction of military courts, increased efforts by the legislative, judicial and executive authorities were noted. It made recommendations. 92. New Zealand highlighted the National System for Human Rights and International Humanitarian Law, yet remained concerned at armed attacks on indigenous peoples and people of African descent. It commended the attention to women’s sexual and reproductive rights, notably the decriminalization of abortion in certain circumstances. It made recommendations. 93. Nicaragua took particular note of the National Development Plan and commended efforts for peace and well-being. Colombia was urged to continue efforts on prosperity, and was commended for its food security policy, which particularly benefited women. 94. Niger applauded the ratification of international human rights instruments and the implementation of the National Development Plan. It noted the National Conference on Human Rights and International Humanitarian Law and welcomed the agreement concluded between Colombia and the International Criminal Court. It made recommendations. 95. Nigeria commended the progress achieved in the protection and promotion of human rights. Nigeria made recommendations. 96. Norway fully concurred with the comments of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights regarding the situation in Colombia. Welcoming the commitment to extend the mandate of the OHCHR office in Colombia, it called for all aspects of the existing mandate to be extended. Norway made recommendations. 97. The Plurinational State of Bolivia welcomed the report submitted by Colombia, and in particular the achievements reported, and urged Colombia to continue its efforts in the field of human rights. It made recommendations. 98. The delegation of Colombia explained that the victims law favored land restitution over land buy. By April 17, 12,000 hectares had been restituted to the original owners and, with regard to the territorial rights of ethnic communities, 150,000 hectares of land had been protected. A programme focused on facilitating access by women and girls to land restitution had been implemented. 99. The National Protection Unit, created in November 2011, currently was providing protection for 7,834 people, including 633 trade unionists, 559 human rights defenders, and 490 land claimants, among others, particularly in remote and rural areas. The Unit’s budget for 2013 was expected to reach US$ 190 million, with particular emphasis on the protection of victims and land restitution leaders. The delegation stressed that the Unit was not an intelligence agency; its sole purpose was the protection of life and human rights. 100. With regard to economic, social and cultural rights, poverty had fallen by 4.5 percentage points in the last two years, reaching 32.7 per cent in 2012. During the same period, the proportion of the population living in extreme poverty fell by 1.9 percentage points, to 10.4 per cent. Additionally, the Government had achieved a reduction in inequality, thus bringing the country to the regional average and improving its position in the international ranking. The Government was committed to ensuring inclusion and social mobility for all Colombians. In November 2011, the Social Inclusion and Reconciliation Sector had been established. The Department for Social Prosperity led this sector. The flagship programme to fight poverty – More Families in Action – had benefited over 2.7 million families. Additionally, the Government had launched a programme to build 100,000 free houses intended for victims of violence, the poor and the vulnerable. 101. Unemployment in Colombia in 2012 stood at 10.4 per cent, the lowest level since 2001, despite the international economic slowdown. 102. In the area of education, the delegation highlighted the introduction in 2012 of free universal education to the eleventh grade, which had benefited more than 8.5 million students. Also, dropouts had been reduced and the illiteracy rate of people between the ages of 15 and 24 had fallen. 103. The Colombian health system still faced enormous challenges. Nevertheless, the delegation noted that the entire population had guaranteed access to health care either through insurance or under the system in place for the uninsured poor population. 104. The State had made significant progress in the comprehensive protection of children. It had set up a single information system that facilitated monitoring of the progression of the rights of children. Also, investment in children had increased to up to US$ 9.8 billion in 2011. Malnutrition levels had decreased from 16 to 13.2 per cent, and the Government was committed to a comprehensive care strategy. In addition, children’s nutrition continued to improve. 105. The State had instituted programmes to reduce the risks associated with teen pregnancy, sexual violence, use of psychoactive substances, child labour and illegal recruitment by organized groups outside the law. The delegation noted that the State did not recruit minors. This violation of international humanitarian law was committed only by armed groups outside the law. 106. The Government recognized the impact that the armed conflict had on children. Since 1999, the Colombian Family Welfare Institute had provided 5,170 children with comprehensive support under a specialized programme for the care of children demobilized from armed groups outside the law. 107. With respect to indigenous peoples, the mechanisms for dialogue and consensus had been strengthened. Colombia had made significant progress in building its own systems of intercultural education and health care for indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities, as well as methods of addressing issues of sexual violence and forced recruitment and combating impunity. However, Colombians continued to face structural and historical challenges. 108. Regarding dialogue with civil society and the National Plan of Action on Human Rights, the delegation noted the establishment, in 2011, of a National System and a National Conference on Human Rights. The system dealt with issues that had been identified in the Plan of Action, coordinated 63 public institutions, developed indicators of economic, social and cultural rights, and advanced other specific policies. For instance, in 2012, a Working Group on Business and Human Rights was established and a forum on free trade and human rights was convened. 109. Dialogue with civil society organizations had been strengthened within the framework of the National Human Rights Conference, convened by the Government, civil society and the international community. 110. Regarding women’s issues, in 2012 the Government adopted the Gender Equality Policy and the comprehensive plan to ensure women a life free of violence. The policy had a budget of nearly US$ 1.9 billion, and reflected international instruments such as Security Council resolutions 1325 and 1820. Recognizing the persistence of factors that hindered access to justice in cases of sexual violence, the State would continue to work on a strategy to strengthen prevention, comprehensive care for victims, effective investigation and prosecution of such acts. 111. In reference to the rights of the LGBTI community, the Government had included in the National Development Plan a mandate to design a public policy for that group. In that regard, the National Statistics Department had begun to establish a baseline profile of the LGBTI population. In the same vein, a committee to deal with urgent cases and receive complaints on human rights violations against members of the LGBTI community had been established in 2011. To date, more than 100 cases have been submitted for consideration by that mechanism. 112. The delegation also highlighted actions taken by the Government on the question of forced disappearances. The relevant institutions in Colombia had obtained some results in finding and identifying disappeared persons. During the first year of the current administration almost 10,000 human remains had been identified. In 2010 the Government had created a genetic data bank under the authority of the Attorney General. 113. In concluding, the delegation stated that the questions and recommendations received were fundamental to improving the human rights situation, achieving peace, overcoming hate and seeking forgiveness and reconciliation. The Vice-President highlighted those recommendations that requested the respect of trade unions as institutions of democracy, the advance of social dialogue and the end of employment intermediation. The Government shared the concerns expressed by some countries in the areas of corporate social responsibility, the situation of children and women, and discrimination against ethnic and other minorities. 114. The Vice-President announced that at the time of the adoption of the report of the second review of Colombia by the Working Group, the delegation would have ready written answers to the questions received during the interactive dialogue as well as the Government’s position on recommendations.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**  ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 115. The recommendations listed below have been examined by Colombia and enjoy its support. Colombia submitted its views on these recommendations. These views are included in an addendum to the report of the Working Group (A/HRC/24/6/Add.1): 115.1. Implement the recommendations made by the United Nations Special Representative of the Secretary General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, during her visit to Colombia in May 2012 (Sweden); 115.2. Develop and implement a comprehensive and interdisciplinary action plan aimed at combating violence against women, in consultation with victims and women organizations, and based on the recommendations made by the United Nations and the Inter-American human rights system (Belgium); 115.3. Follow-up and implement effectively the recommendations of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict (Austria); 115.4. Provide additional resources to its anti-trafficking in persons programmes (Philippines); 115.5. Take the necessary measures to ensure that the legislative development and the practical application of the reform of the Military Criminal Jurisdiction does not generate impunity, but rather helps to reduce it drastically regarding the human rights violations committed by Public Forces (Spain); 115.6. Take concrete actions in the elaboration of regulatory laws of the constitutional reform to ensure that victim’s rights are guaranteed, that military courts have a restrictive and exceptional scope, and that alleged human rights crimes, such as extrajudicial killings, in no case will be addressed by military courts (Sweden). 116. The following recommendations enjoy the support of Colombia which considers that they are already implemented or in the process of implementation. Colombia submitted its views on these recommendations. These views are included in an addendum to the report of the Working Group (A/HRC/24/6/Add.1): 116.1. Become a party of the international instruments of protection and promotion of human rights still pending ratification, as appropriate, such as the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness (Ecuador); 116.2. Share good practices in mechanisms for follow-up and monitoring of human rights obligations accepted by the State (Cuba); 116.3. Continue to implement an early warning system, within the framework of the work of the Ombudsman’s Office, in order to prevent different human rights violations (Serbia); 116.4. Continue its effort to strengthen its institutional capacity and legislative framework to combat violent crimes and maintain law and order to ensure the enjoyment of human rights by its people (Singapore); 116.5. Develop, at the regional level, the State’s institutions in charge of the reconstruction of historical memory of violations of human rights committed during the armed conflict (Switzerland); 116.6. Continue providing spaces for dialogue between civil society and the State to discuss human rights issues, such as the National Round table on Safeguards (Dominican Republic); 116.7. Move forward in implementing the National Human Rights System, with a view to ensuring greater consistency and comprehensive State actions in the area of human rights (Dominican Republic); 116.8. Continue to work with the National Human Rights System, to achieve greater compliance with international commitments, incorporating a differentiated approach to sectoral policies (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 116.9. Continue efforts through dialogue with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia to reach an agreement to end the armed conflict (Pakistan); 116.10. Continue working towards peace through dialogue (Cuba); 116.11. Activate a negotiating process for a peaceful settlement (Russian Federation); 116.12. Continue its work to strengthen the rule of law and its efforts within the peace process between the Government and the FARC (Costa Rica); 116.13. Continue moving forward with a view to achieving peace through a dialogue (Dominican Republic); 116.14. Continue with negotiations to end the conflict and to build a stable and lasting peace (Guatemala); 116.15. Continue its efforts in consolidating peace as well as efforts to achieve social inclusion and reconciliation through the implementation of its National Development Plan for 2010-2014 “Prosperity for All” (Malaysia); 116.16. Make every possible effort to promote social integration of the past participants in illegal armed groups (Russian Federation); 116.17. Implement the Victims and Land Restitution Law with justice and verify that it becomes part of an integral policy of development, so that it contributes to a sustainable and dignified quality of life for the victims (Panama); 116.18. Continue implementing the Victims and Land Restitution Law (Dominican Republic, Serbia); 116.19. Strengthen relevant institutions in order to take more effective measures at the national, regional and local level to guarantee the protection of persons involved in land restitution procedures, in particular the claimants, their counsel, the relevant officials and human rights defenders (Switzerland); 116.20. Improve measures to protect applicants, particularly those from rural areas, in order to strengthen the land restitution process (Australia); 116.21. Take all necessary steps to enhance the effectiveness of the Protection Programme, including through speedy risk assessment studies and implementation of approved schemes, clear criteria for defining risk, collective protection measures and the inclusion of family members in the scheme (Ireland); 116.22. Identify plans of action for the enforcement of the Victims and Land Restitution Law (Holy See); 116.23. Consider the possibility of adopting further measures for the integral attention and reparation of victims and land restitution, aiming to attend and redress the victims of violence (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 116.24. Give continuity to efforts undertaken to implement measures of care, assistance and comprehensive reparation to the victims of the internal armed conflict (Brazil); 116.25. Provide to Colombian refugees the opportunity to present their request for reparation at the moment of their voluntary repatriation, if it is the case, so that they can benefit from the Victims and Land Restitution Law (Panama); 116.26. Consider designing operative mechanisms to ensure that boys, girls and adolescents who are victims of the armed conflict be a priority in programmes to restore their rights and reparation programmes, taking into account the right to family reunification, health, education and psychosocial care (Uruguay); 116.27. Increase its efforts on socio-economic reform and strengthen the law enforcement system toward enhancing national reconciliation, combating violence, illegal armed groups and maintaining public order (Viet Nam); 116.28. Redouble on-going efforts to improve the quality of life of the most vulnerable groups, in particular indigenous peoples and people of African descent (Peru); 116.29. Adopt all necessary measures in order to ensure full protection of the children and the enjoyment of all rights by the children of Colombia (Romania); 116.30. Increase efforts to apply the existing legislation to prevent separation of boys and girls from their family environment due to the economic conditions of the family, through training programmes, information and awareness-raising campaigns (Uruguay); 116.31. Continue its policy in favour of children, in particular the fight already initiated by the Government against child labour (Burundi); 116.32. Put in place a national strategy in the area of public security (Niger); 116.33. Take comprehensive measures to increase the level of public security in the country (Russian Federation); 116.34. Work toward strengthening security to allow a harmonious development of the country (Congo); 116.35. Consolidate current policies for the preventive risk management of violations to the right to life, to liberty, integrity and personal security (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 116.36. Continue its efforts to introduce a human rights perspective in business and trade (Philippines); 116.37. Continue to incorporate economic, social and cultural rights in the national strategy to combat drug trafficking (Egypt); 116.38. Extend an invitation to the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences (Brazil); 116.39. Invite the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, and develop, in consultation with civil society, a comprehensive plan of action to address sexual violence (Hungary); 116.40. Continue undertaking effective actions for the protection and promotion of the rights of women in the country (Azerbaijan); 116.41. Continue making efforts to reduce the gap in female participation in the labour market, in the context of the National Policy on Gender Equality (Chile); 116.42. Intensify efforts to guarantee gender equality and to empower women, including by developing its national policy on gender equality and by continuing the work currently underway in the Intersectoral Commission to Eradicate Violence against women and the Legal Commission on Equity for Women in Congress (Nigeria); 116.43. Consider the possibility of enhancing the necessary measures for the protection and integration of the LGBT population (Argentina); 116.44. Intensify the Government presence in the rural areas whose communities are victims of abuses, such as forced displacement, as well as target of violence perpetrated by criminal organizations (Italy); 116.45. Continue taking assertive measures in combating organized crime and criminal gangs with a view to protecting the civilian population (Malaysia); 116.46. Take necessary steps to incorporate elements of human rights education in the training of law enforcement agencies (Pakistan); 116.47. Continue implementing its National strategy in favour of children with particular attention to children victims of landmines as well as to pursue its efforts in preventing the involvement of children in armed conflicts (Algeria); 116.48. Enhance the protection for children, including by improving the investigation, prosecution and prevention of violence against children (Cyprus); 116.49. Develop a comprehensive plan of action to address violence against women on the basis of the repeated recommendations made by the United Nations and the Inter-American human rights system (Kyrgyzstan); 116.50. Continue to prioritise policies aimed at promoting the enjoyment of women’s rights and prevention of sexual violence (South Africa); 116.51. Consider developing and implementing a comprehensive plan of action to further women’s rights, including measures to combat violence against women (Indonesia); 116.52. Step up efforts to prevent sexual violence against women and children and strengthen measures for the rehabilitation of boys and girls affected by armed conflicts (Paraguay); 116.53. Strengthen its efforts in the fight to eliminate violence against women and children (Senegal); 116.54. Increase efforts in addressing violence against women, including a provision of access to justice and medical care for victims as well as their social reintegration, in particular within the context of the armed conflict (Slovakia); 116.55. Elaborate and apply in an effective manner an exhaustive and interdisciplinary action plan to address violence against women (Spain); 116.56. Continue to work constructively to implement the laws, decrees and resolutions that have been approved to combat violence against women and girls and to guarantee access to justice for victims of sexual violence (Canada); 116.57. Guarantee access to justice for victims of sexual violence by ensuring the effective implementation of laws on the protection of women (France); 116.58. Redouble efforts against trafficking in persons, in particular through the adoption of the new National Strategy 2013-2018 (Peru); 116.59. Continue to combat human trafficking, in particular of women, boys and girls and continue strengthening its programs to prevent trafficking, in accordance with the National Integrated Strategy to Combat Human Trafficking (State of Palestine); 116.60. Strengthen its human trafficking prevention programmes in its new National Strategy to Combat Trafficking in Persons (Trinidad and Tobago); 116.61. Strengthen the trafficking prevention programmes under the national strategy to combat human trafficking 2007-2012, with particular attention to children from disadvantaged groups (Egypt); 116.62. Continue its work in combating trafficking in persons, with particular attention given to children and disadvantaged groups, as envisaged in its future plan of National Strategy on trafficking prevention (Cambodia); 116.63. Continue specially its efforts to combat human trafficking (Honduras); 116.64. Consider strengthening the comprehensive policy in the National Strategy to Combat Trafficking in Persons, including preventive measures (Indonesia); 116.65. Strengthen its trafficking prevention programme under the National Strategy to Combat Human Trafficking 2007-2012, with particular attention to children and women (Kyrgyzstan); 116.66. Continue its efforts to fight trafficking in persons within the framework of its Comprehensive National Strategy to Combat Trafficking in Persons. In this regard, we urge the Government of Colombia to continue to work towards finalizing and adopting its National Strategy 2013-2018 (Nigeria); 116.67. Strengthen the judiciary in order to guarantee its investigation and prosecution capacity so as to ensure access to justice for all citizens, in particular victims of sexual violence (Switzerland); 116.68. Continue to fight impunity and promote the respect of human rights by improving the judiciary (Gabon); 116.69. Ensure that its military justice system is fully compliant with international human rights law, and that all allegations of human rights abuses by military personnel are investigated promptly and effectively (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 116.70. Guarantee independence of justice, equality before the law and supervision of military jurisdictions to fight impunity of crimes committed during the conflict, particularly extrajudicial killings (France); 116.71. Uphold commitments to prevent impunity for human rights violations (United Sates of America); 116.72. Continue its efforts to combat impunity for serious human rights violations (Argentina); 116.73. Ensure appropriate protection of human rights defenders operating in the country, recognising the legitimacy of their work, including full and impartial investigations and prosecutions into all alleged human rights violations committed against them (Slovakia); 116.74. Reinforce measures for the protection of human rights defenders (Slovenia); 116.75. Increase efforts to investigate and prosecute those responsible for threats or violence against human rights defenders, trade unionists, community leaders and journalists (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 116.76. Promptly investigate and prosecute perpetrators of threats, extortion, and attacks on human rights defenders, vulnerable individuals, unionists, and potential beneficiaries of the Victims’ Law (United States of America); 116.77. Ensure that judicial authorities carry out thorough and impartial investigations regarding acts of violence against human rights defenders (Belgium); 116.78. Take further steps to prevent incidents of violence against all of its people, including targeted groups such as community leaders, journalists, and land claimants by improving current protection and prevention programmes, introducing education campaigns, and ensuring effective intervention and investigation by law enforcement officials (Canada); 116.79. Ensure that the relatives of victims of enforced disappearances, their representatives, and those who report enforced disappearances will not be subject to attacks and persecution (Czech Republic); 116.80. Take all the necessary measures in order to protect human rights defenders against threats and attacks, and ensure that the perpetrators of such acts are brought to justice (France); 116.81. Ensure that human rights defenders in rural areas are equally and effectively protected also in view of the existing challenges of the implementation of the Victims and Land Restitution Law (Germany); 116.82. Enact legislation recognizing the legitimate work of human rights defenders and ensuring their life, security and integrity, and conduct prompt, impartial and effective investigations into allegations of threats, attacks and violence against them (Hungary); 116.83. Enforce the legislative efforts regarding the security of human rights defenders, with a view to effectively implementing measures and programmes (Netherlands); 116.84. Further strengthen its protection measures to remediate the attacks against trade unionists (Norway); 116.85. Improve the access to the National Protection Unit and its impact in rural areas, and take new steps to protect human rights defenders, journalists, indigenous leaders and people involved in land restitution processes (Norway); 116.86. Strengthen actions and programmes of the national government to make the Colombian society more equal and free from poverty (Cuba); 116.87. Continue to implement, in cooperation with relevant United Nations agencies, policies and programmes to reduce poverty and improve the well-being of its people (Singapore); 116.88. Continue advancing in the reduction of poverty and inequality (Spain); 116.89. Continue its measures for the overall alleviation of poverty in the country (Azerbaijan); 116.90. Continue consolidating its successful plans for the reduction of poverty, extreme poverty and its combat against social exclusion (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 116.91. Allocate resources and accelerate national programmes on job creation, poverty reduction, decent housing, land restitution, gender equality and improvement of education and health care services (Viet Nam); 116.92. Continue to further address the social inequality that remains one of the challenges in the country (Cambodia); 116.93. Strengthen the measures regarding education and reduction of poverty of minority populations (Congo); 116.94. Further promote economic and social rights of minorities and vulnerable groups (Niger); 116.95. Continue working for the comprehensive application of its National Policy of Food and Nutritional Security, promoting the generation of self-consumption food (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 116.96. Strengthen the enforcement of labour laws, especially by increasing training for labour inspectors to enable more thorough investigations of alleged violations, and ensuring timely collection of fines (United States of America); 116.97. Adopt further measures to reduce maternal morbidity and infant mortality (Sri Lanka); 116.98. Take steps to ensure that health providers and medical professionals act in full conformity with the Constitutional Court ruling decriminalizing abortion in certain circumstances (New Zealand); 116.99. Intensify its efforts aimed at providing access of all children to free and compulsory primary education (Poland); 116.100. Further strengthen efforts to combat discrimination in education (Sri Lanka); 116.101. Continue adopting new measures to combat discrimination in education and to protect minority groups (State of Palestine); 116.102. Continue prioritizing education opportunities for the largest possible proportions of rural inhabitants and vulnerable populations (Azerbaijan); 116.103. Ensure access of all children to free and compulsory primary education and accede to the UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education (Czech Republic); 116.104. Further strengthen its efforts in promoting the rights of persons with disabilities and to ensure their integration in the society (Algeria); 116.105. Maximize, through consultation mechanisms, the participation of indigenous peoples in the determination of the public policies that affect them (Peru); 116.106. Introduce stronger measures to protect indigenous peoples and Afro-Colombians from attacks by armed groups and take measures to guarantee their rights (Republic of Korea); 116.107. Continue its actions in favour of the improvement of conditions of life of indigenous peoples (Senegal); 116.108. Continue to implement in a comprehensive manner economic and social development to further improve the living standards of its people and reduce poverty and illiteracy (China); 116.109. Continue to develop and expand programmes for the protection of indigenous peoples (Egypt); 116.110. Ensure that the legislation regarding the rights of minorities and indigenous people continue to be fully implemented, paying special attention to the protection of those people most vulnerable to threats and violence, such as human rights defenders (Italy); 116.111. Take all necessary measures to ensure the full and sustainable protection of indigenous peoples and peoples of African descent, in terms of both physical security and land rights (New Zealand); 116.112. Provide demobilized children with assistance and penalize those responsible for their recruitment (Poland); 116.113. Investigate thoroughly all cases of illegal recruitment of children in armed groups and bring the perpetrators to justice (Austria); 116.114. Continue to take effective measures to ensure the recovery, rehabilitation, and reintegration of child soldiers (Austria); 116.115. Revise and strengthen the mechanisms of social integration and reparation for demobilized child soldiers, in the framework of the Victims’ Law (Belgium); 116.116. Continue to provide assistance to demobilized children, independently of the illegal armed group they may have belonged to, along the lines suggested by the Secretary-General (Chile); 116.117. Intensify its efforts to counter the widespread practice of forced recruitment of children by non-state armed groups, and ensure that all demobilized children are given protection, reintegration and rehabilitation assistance (Hungary); 116.118. Take further measures to strengthen the judicial system and to increase accountability for human rights violations, including by ensuring the investigation and prosecution of these crimes (Canada); 116.119. Protect the right to property of the land of the indigenous and traditional peasant communities to prevent the dispossession of land suitable for agriculture in the present context of economic and social development (Mexico); 116.120. Continue with the policy of universal coverage of education to reach the rural areas (Gabon). 117. The following recommendations were noted by Colombia for further consideration of national authorities. Colombia submitted its views on these recommendations. These views are included in an addendum to the report of the Working Group (A/HRC/24/6/Add.1): 117.1 Establish, in the near future, the Truth Commission to facilitate the justice and peace within the country (Trinidad and Tobago); 117.2. Include women and gender advisors as part of the team of main negotiators and develop a National Plan of Action for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (Portugal); 117.3. Maintain and strengthen its political support and financial cooperation for the operations of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, for the implementation of social projects in favour of Colombian refugees (Ecuador); 117.4. Further recognize the rights of same-sex couples by legalizing same-sex marriage and adoption (Iceland); 117.5. In order to combat impunity, support the bill before Congress “to guarantee access to justice for victims of sexual violence, especially sexual violence in the context of armed conflict” (Finland); 117.6. Ensure the effective implementation of Order 092 of the Constitutional Court, which referred 183 cases of sexual violence against women to the Attorney-General’s Office, the incorporation of Law 1257 on violence against women into the Criminal Code, and create an inter-institutional system for monitoring of the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (Ireland); 117.7. Ensure that the application of the legislation on military jurisdiction, as well as the conduct of the peace between the Government and FARC, be consistent with the goal of the fight against impunity (Italy); 117.8. Take further measures to ensure that the military justice system does not claim jurisdiction in human rights cases involving members of security forces (Portugal). 118. The following recommendations did not enjoy the support of Colombia. Colombia submitted its views on these recommendations. These views are included in an addendum to the report of the Working Group (A/HRC/24/6/Add.1): 118.1. Ratify international human rights instruments to which Colombia is not yet a party (Niger); 118.2. Consider ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Peru); Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (Mexico, Philippines, Slovenia, Turkey); Become a party to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (Montenegro); Consider the possibility of acceding to the Optional Protocol of the Convention against Torture with a view to strengthening preventive activities (Uruguay); 118.3. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and establish a national mechanism for visits to places of detention (Costa Rica); 118.4. Accede to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and establish the national preventive mechanism accordingly (Czech Republic); 118.5. Conclude rapidly the process of ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture, as well as the process of harmonization of its national legislation with the provisions of the Rome Statute (Tunisia); 118.6. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Guatemala); 118.7. Consider signing and ratifying the new Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Slovakia); 118.8. Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Portugal); 118.9. Become a party to the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Montenegro); 118.10. Consider ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure, to ensure that the child’s voice and needs are heard and protected (Thailand); 118.11. Become a party to the third Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Montenegro); 118.12. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Germany); 118.13. Consider the possibility of recognizing the competence of the Committee on Enforced Disappearances to receive and examine communications – from or in favour of victims – as well as from other State Parties (Uruguay); 118.14. Amend the Criminal Code so that crimes against humanity and all war crimes are defined as crimes under national law (Finland); 118.15. Tackle chronic lack of human and financial means especially those aiming at harmonizing the tasks of such diverse institutions as the National Unit of Protection, the police, the Attorney-General’s Office and the courts (Netherlands); 118.16. Adopt appropriate measures to address the expansion of illegal armed groups that have emerged after the demobilization of paramilitary organizations, paying particular attention to combating impunity, ensuring independence of judges and the judiciary system, and providing reparation for victims of such events (Thailand); 118.17. Carry out its efforts to end the use or recruitment of children by armed groups or forces, particularly in cooperation with the United Nations (France); 118.18. Review the bill and relevant legislative framework to ensure civilian courts hear cases related to violations of human rights (Australia); 118.19. Take measures to limit the authority of military tribunals which are assuming the functions of civil justice (Russian Federation); 118.20. Maintain the institution of the family and marriage as a conjugal union between a man and a woman based on free consent (Holy See); 118.21. Implement fully the recommendations of the OHCHR field office as a mean to contribute to the improvement of the human rights situation on the ground (Austria); 118.22. Take measures to address claims of continuing extrajudicial executions (Australia); 118.23. Address how victims of sexual violence by illegal armed groups who are not considered parties to the conflict can access appropriate reparations (Australia); 118.24. Take concrete and effective actions to implement the existing legal framework and to tackle the widespread impunity for crimes related to sexual violence (Sweden); 118.25. Undertake effective measures to fight the widespread impunity and ensure that the reform of the military criminal justice does not lead to impunity in cases of human rights violations committed by security forces (Germany); 118.26. Reinforce its efforts to end impunity concerning serious human rights violations including those perpetrated by high ranking military officers as well as those related to sexual violence against women (Republic of Korea). 119. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole.  III. Voluntary pledges and commitments 120. Adopt all necessary measures to combat impunity in cases of human rights violations perpetrated by any person, including members of the security forces. 121. Advance in the design of a public policy on human rights education and culture encompassing all State agencies and the general public. 122. Continue with the implementation of the recommendations of the OHCHR office in Colombia, according to their pertinence to the national reality. 123. Continue to follow up the UPR in the framework of the National System for Human Rights and International Humanitarian Law. 124. Share, with States that request it, the experiences of the National Human Rights System, the comprehensive monitoring system for international recommendations on human rights (SISREDH) and the monitoring mechanism of the universal periodic review, in the framework of international cooperation. 125. Strengthen mechanisms and policies to fight trafficking in persons within the context of the national strategy and reinforce measures to address the needs of victims of this crime, including return, security, assistance and counselling. Also continue to carry out diplomatic efforts and technical cooperation initiatives with the aim of establishing or strengthening bilateral and regional mechanisms that address this transnational problem.  126. Continue to advance in the implementation of the national mechanism for visits to places of detention. Annex [English only]   Composition of the delegation The delegation of Colombia was headed by Vice-President Angelino Garzón and composed of the following members: • Mr. Fernando CARRILLO, Minister of Interior; • Mr. Jorge Enrique BEDOYA, Vice-Minister for International Affairs and Policies, Ministry of National defence; • Mr. Miguel SAMPER STRAUSS, Vice-Minister of Justice; • Mr. Fernando PERDOMO TORRES, Deputy Attorney General; • Ms. Alma Viviana PEREZ, Director of the Presidential Program on Human Rights and International Humanitarian Law; • Mr. Assad JATER, Director for Human Rights, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Juan Carlos GOMEZ, Director for Human Rights, Ministry of National Defence; • Mr. Andres VILLAMIZAR PACHON, Director of the National Unit of Protection; • Ms. Maria Paulina RIVEROS, Director for Human Rights, Ministry of Interior; • Mr. Gabriel MUJUY, Director of the Indigenous Program, Ministry of Interior; • Ms. Adriana Maria GONZALEZ, Deputy Director General, Colombian Institute of Family Welfare; • Ms. Ivonne MORENO HORTA, Deputy Director of the National Unit for Land Restitution; • Mr. Claudio Galan PACHON, Director of Justice, Security and Government, National Department of Planning; • Ms. Paula GAVIRIA, Director of the Unit for the Integral Service and Reparation for Victims, Department for Social Prosperity; • Mr. David Giovanni TURIZO, Deputy Director of Technical Management for protection of children and adolescents, Colombian Institute of Family Welfare; • Ms. Diana AVILA, Advisor, Presidential Program on Human Rights and International Humanitarian Law; • Ms. Diana PRADO, Advisor, Presidential Program on Human Rights and International Humanitarian Law; • Ms. Juliana CORTES, Advisor of the Cabinet of the Minister of Justice and Law; • Ms. Juliana BUENAVENTURA, Advisor, Direction of Human Rights, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Ana Maria Duran, Press Advisor, Presidency of the Republic; • Ms. Ana Carolina ZAPATA, Press Advisor, Ministry of Foreign Relations; • Mr. Ricardo FORERO, Advisor, Cabinet Secretariat of the Vice-Minister for International Affairs and Policies, Ministry of National Defence; • Mr. Andres Felipe HERREÑO LOPERA, Advisor of the Deputy Director General of the Department for Social Prosperity; • Ms. Alicia ARANGO OLMOS, Ambassador, Permanent Representative to the United Nations; • Ms. Beatriz LONDOÑO, Ambassador of Colombia to Switzerland; • Mr. Carlos Enrique VALENCIA MUÑOZ, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of Colombia to the United Nations; • Brigadier Diego Yesid SANCHEZ RUIZ; • Lieutenant Sandra Patricia FUENTES CORTES; • Lieutenant Diego Fernando NUÑEZ GONZALEZ.     