  United Nations  A/HRC/24/16     General Assembly  Distr.: General 8 July 2013  Original: English  Human Rights Council Twenty-fourth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   Cuba Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–169 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–26 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  27–169 5  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  170–171 12  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  30 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its sixteenth session from 22 April to 3 May 2013. The review of Cuba was held at the 16th meeting on 1 May 2013. The delegation of Cuba was headed by Bruno Rodríguez Parilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs. At its 18th meeting, held on 3 May 2013, the Working Group adopted the report on Cuba. 2. On 14 January 2013, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Cuba: Guatemala, Montenegro and Thailand. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Cuba:  (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/CUB/1);  (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/CUB/2 and Corr.1).  (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/CUB/3 and Corr.1). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by the Czech Republic, Germany, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Cuba through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR).  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation of Cuba indicated that the economic, political and media blockade imposed by the United States of America was a mass, flagrant and systematic violation of human rights which caused damages, scarcities and hardships, but had not managed to hinder the provision of equal opportunities, the equitable distribution of wealth or the realization of social justice. 6. The relentless attempts by the United States to impose a “change of regime” on the Cuban people was a serious violation of its right to self-determination, which had failed to prevent the active, democratic and direct participation of its citizens in the construction of its constitutional order, in the decisions adopted by its Government and in the election of its authorities. 7. Cuba was a State where there had not been a single extrajudicial execution, and where there were no tortured or disappeared persons. 8. The national report was the result of a broad and participatory process of consultations which had involved several governmental institutions, the Parliament, several civil society organizations and other relevant institutions. 9. Significant economic and social changes had taken place since the first presentation by Cuba before the UPR mechanism in 2009. The country had moved forward in the process of institutional development; Cuba had continued to improve citizens’ participation and control as the fundamental basis of its democracy and had upheld efforts to achieve sustainable development with social justice. 10. Cuba remained committed to its unshakeable determination to move forward with its socialist, autochthonous, original, democratic and openly participatory development. 11. Cuba had not come to the session to declare that its work had been completed. Neither did Cuba accept the existence of a unique or universal democracy model, much less the imposition of the political system of the western industrialized countries. 12. One of the most transcendental developments that had occurred since the previous session was the adoption by the National Assembly of People’s Power of the Guidelines for the Economic and Social Policy of Cuba, which were a set of essential decisions aimed at the updating of the Cuban economic and social model as well as the programme of the Government. 13. The system for the legal protection of human rights in Cuba was not confined to a description in the Constitution. Human rights were duly developed and guaranteed in other substantive and procedural provisions in force, in accordance with the rights enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and all other international human rights instruments. 14. The right to free universal education and health was guaranteed to everyone. The rights to life, liberty and security of persons were based on the principle of respect for human dignity and were the fundamental pillars in all the actions taken by the Cuban authorities and the functioning of the entire society. 15. Five Cuban anti-terrorists who were suffering an unjust and prolonged incarceration in the United States were deprived of every protection. Their legal defence had been hindered, they had been subject to cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment and several of them had not been allowed visits from their relatives. 16. Cuba recognized, respected and guaranteed religious liberty without any discrimination whatsoever. All citizens’ rights to freedoms of opinion, expression, information and press were recognized. 17. The democratization of the Internet was urgently needed, as was the transfer of resources and suitable technologies for social communication. 18. Between 2010 and 2013 the United States had allocated $191.7 million for the funding of organizations and “hirelings”, the use of information technologies for subversive purposes and illegal radio and television broadcasts intended to bring about a change of regime in Cuba. 19. In Cuba equality and non-discrimination were fully guaranteed. The Government of Cuba continued to implement a series of laws, policies and programmes aimed at upholding those principles. 20. Institutional racism had been eradicated. Cuba was proud of its African heritage. Recently, a decision had been taken to appoint one Vice-President of the Council of State to follow up and monitor the struggle against racism and racial discrimination. Similarly, the First Vice-President of the Council of State and of Ministers had been invested with powers to protect and oversee the exercise of children’s rights.  21. The struggle against discrimination based on sexual orientation was another area in which Cuba had recorded sustained progress. 22. The penitentiary system in Cuba was based on the principle of human development. Cuba abided by all the precepts contained in the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners and prioritized the preventive approach through a number of social programmes. 23. Through a number of cooperation programmes, Cuba also contributed to the exercise and attainment of human rights of other peoples of the world. 24. Cuba maintained a high level of cooperation and interaction with the procedures and mechanisms of the United Nations system in the area of human rights, which were implemented universally and on a non-discriminatory basis. 25. Cuba had always expressed its unequivocal willingness to establish a dialogue on every issue and with all States on the basis of mutual respect, sovereign equality and the recognition of the right to self-determination. 26. Cuba was open to a constructive and respectful dialogue.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 27. During the interactive dialogue, 132 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the interactive dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. All written statements of the delegations are posted on the extranet of the Human Rights Council, if available.1  1 https://extranet.ohchr.org/sites/upr/Sessions/16session/Cuba/Pages/default.aspx. 28. Namibia referred to the impact of the embargo imposed against Cuba on human development. 29. Nepal highlighted progress in several fields, including women’s rights, housing and food, and in meeting the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). 30. The Netherlands welcomed the migration law; it also expressed concern at the reported increase in arbitrary detention, harassment and abusive controls. 31. Nicaragua highlighted the commitment of Cuba to human rights despite the blockade, and condemned the convictions against five Cubans. 32. The Niger appreciated efforts made in the fields of health and education, women’s rights and migration. 33. Nigeria appreciated the generous assistance provided by Cuba to developing countries. 34. Norway welcomed efforts made by Cuba in the area of social, cultural and economic rights, but remained concerned at the lack of protection for human rights defenders. 35. Oman highlighted that Cuba had made human rights promotion a priority, to ensure protection for all citizens. 36. Pakistan appreciated the progress made by Cuba, irrespective of resource constraints due to unilateral sanctions. 37. Panama highlighted efforts made by Cuba regarding assistance for youth and children and in the area of women’s rights and equality, and noted advances with respect to the MDGs. 38. Peru underscored achievements in migration policy and in economic, social and cultural rights, despite the imposed restrictions. 39. The Philippines commended the leadership of Cuba, especially on the right to food and on international cooperation. 40. Poland was concerned at reported violations against human rights defenders and reiterated treaty body recommendations on establishing a national human rights institution. 41. Qatar thanked the delegation for its presentation. 42. Romania congratulated Cuba for fulfilling most of the MDGs. 43. The Russian Federation noted that considerable progress had been made, particularly in socioeconomic areas, despite the unilateral sanctions against Cuba. 44. Saudi Arabia welcomed efforts by Cuba to promote and protect human rights. 45. Senegal highlighted efforts by Cuba to improve the living conditions of its population despite multiple challenges. 46. Serbia highlighted the importance of raising awareness among children and youth with regard to their rights, and of developing a hotline to prevent drug use. 47. Sierra Leone noted MDG achievements and appreciated the assistance provided by Cuba, including in the medical field. 48. Singapore noted the significant strides made in education, health and women’s empowerment. 49. Slovakia requested information on stakeholder consultation in preparing and bringing to public attention the national report. 50. Slovenia welcomed progress achieved, yet remained concerned at the continuing restriction of freedoms of expression, assembly and association. 51. Solomon Islands commended Cuba on its achievements, and encouraged the Government and stakeholders to collaborate in the area of human rights. 52. Somalia thanked Cuba for its presentation and the achievements indicated in the national report. 53. South Africa commended Cuba for its expansion of human rights protection for its citizens, as well as its expansion of health care in Africa. 54. South Sudan wished Cuba the best and a successful UPR.  55. Spain referred to a number of planned legislative measures and expressed hope that those would result in human rights improvements. 56. Sri Lanka commended the impressive strides made with regard to human rights, despite the significant challenges.  57. The State of Palestine commended Cuba for its provision of universal access to health care and the establishment of commissions for analysing racial discrimination.  58. The Sudan commended efforts to strengthen institutional capacity and improve the rights of children and persons with disabilities.  59. Sweden was concerned by freedom of expression restrictions, and by reportedly increased levels of arbitrary detention and intimidation of critics.  60. Switzerland commended the de facto moratorium on the death penalty.  61. The Syrian Arab Republic commended the achievements recorded despite the embargo, considered the worst form of human rights violation.  62. Tajikistan commended achievements regarding MDGs, and expressed its trust that Cuba would continue to combat human trafficking. 63. Thailand commended efforts regarding MDGs and the rights to development, food, education and health.  64. Timor-Leste noted achievements in education, health and gender equality. 65. Togo welcomed measures in favour of elderly persons and the State’s health-care system. 66. Trinidad and Tobago noted the ratification of human rights instruments and the country’s strong MDG performance. 67. Tunisia welcomed the strengthened legal and institutional framework and encouraged Cuba to issue a standing invitation to Human Rights Council mandate holders. It expressed solidarity with Cuba, which had suffered 50 years of embargo. 68. Cuba indicated that, regarding national human rights institutions, there was not one single model. Cuba had a national system for the promotion and protection of human rights which functioned effectively and demonstrated the positive fulfilment of the aspirations and interests of the Cuban people. 69. Cuba said that its Government recognized, respected and guaranteed compliance with the labour principles and fundamental rights standardized by the International Labour Organization, which had constitutional status in Cuba. 70. Turkey commended the creation of travel opportunities for Cubans, the expansion of ownership rights and encouragement of entrepreneurship.  71. Turkmenistan welcomed the delegation of Cuba. 72. Uganda commended the achievement of MDGs 1, 2, 3 and 4 despite difficult circumstances; it also commended the country’s cooperation with human rights bodies and its natural disaster programmes. 73. Ukraine reiterated its appreciation for the medical assistance that Cuba had provided for Ukrainian children. 74. The United Arab Emirates acknowledged the importance that Cuba attached to economic, social and cultural rights to improve living conditions and social justice and the steps taken to implement previous recommendations. 75. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland welcomed the new migration law, but remained concerned about the continued restriction of freedom of expression. 76. The United Republic of Tanzania commended Cuba on progress made in the implementation of agreed recommendations despite major challenges, including the embargo and natural disasters. 77. The United States of America raised concerns on impediments to multiparty elections and freedom of expression, and referred to Alan Gross and Oswaldo Paya. 78. Uruguay underscored the implementation of measures to advance human rights, such as those in the areas of migration, prison visits and MDGs, even in a context of economic blockade. 79. Uzbekistan welcomed the progress made by Cuba in the protection and promotion of human rights since the first review. 80. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela welcomed the delegation. 81. Viet Nam expressed its appreciation of the State’s commitments and commendable contributions to the UPR. 82. Yemen welcomed the ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CPED) and new legal rules to expand human rights legislation.  83. Zambia acknowledged the ratification of international instruments and the achievement of some MDGs. Zambia requested Cuba to continue its reform process. 84. Zimbabwe praised Cuba for ensuring a balance between civil and political rights and social, economic and cultural rights, notwithstanding the embargo. 85. Algeria welcomed the remarks made by Cuba in the introduction of its national report. 86. Angola commended achievements regarding MDGs, social and legal reforms and the lifting of restrictions on trips abroad. 87. Mexico recognized the progress made despite the unilateral economic blockade, and noted the elimination of the exit permit. 88. Armenia commended education improvements, including access for students with special needs. 89. Australia welcomed progress in overseas travel. It expressed concern with regard to restrictions on Internet access as well as reports on short-term detention. 90. Austria commended positive measures taken. It expressed concern regarding cases of intimidation, arrests and imprisonment of journalists and members of the political opposition. 91. Azerbaijan commended the State’s cooperation with the United Nations human rights system, and efforts to achieve the MDGs.   92. Bahrain noted achievements and encouraged Cuba to continue its efforts towards the development of Cuban society.  93. Bangladesh commended the success Cuba had achieved in the health sector and welcomed economic reforms.  94. Barbados commended improvements made by Cuba and urged the international community to support its efforts. 95. Belarus commended progress made in human rights. 96. Belgium welcomed the Cuban delegation. 97. Benin welcomed efforts made on behalf of the elderly, persons with disabilities and women’s rights and encouraged the abolition of the death penalty. 98. Bhutan commended activities carried out by Cuba in the areas of education and health, and encouraged Cuba to continue its cooperation with United Nations human rights mechanisms.  99. The Plurinational State of Bolivia welcomed the delegation. 100. Brazil recognized advances, including in the area of migration reform, made despite the fact that Cuba faced a blockade incompatible with human rights. 101. Brunei Darussalam commended the commitment of Cuba to promote the rights of the elderly.  102. Burkina Faso noted the ratification of international instruments and efforts to improve housing and social security. 103. Burundi commended the economic and social policy of Cuba. It thanked Cuba for medical support received during the civil war in Burundi. 104. Cambodia congratulated Cuba for its progress in meeting most MDGs. It expressed its belief that Cuba could do more. 105. Canada asked about the steps taken to provide human rights training for government officials. 106. Cape Verde commended progress with respect to the rights of citizens and the modernization of the economic system despite constraints. 107. Chad commended efforts made by Cuba to improve the promotion and protection of human rights. 108. The delegation indicated that Cuba respected the abolitionist positions on the death penalty. Currently, nobody was serving a death sentence. In Cuba there had never been, nor would there ever be, extrajudicial executions. Cuban judges were independent in their function of delivering justice. 109. Cuba said that progress had continued in recognizing and guaranteeing rights relating to sexual orientation and gender identity, guaranteeing in that way full and responsible enjoyment of sexuality. 110. Cuba said that culture was promoted in the country for all people. Efforts and progress to combat discrimination and to promote equality had been notable. The Government of Cuba was committed to achieving a gradual improvement of the Internet service currently provided, which for the most part was free and with social objectives. 111. The delegation said that freedom of the press was guaranteed in Cuba. Cuba reiterated the willingness of the Government to continue talks with the Government of the United States on the situation of Mr. Gross and of other individuals who were held in detention in Cuba and in the United States. 112. Chile remained concerned over the enjoyment of freedom of expression, and condemned the embargo. 113. China congratulated Cuba on its achievements in the field of human rights. China called on the relevant country to remove the embargo, which violated the human rights of Cubans. 114. Colombia highlighted dialogue, cooperation and assistance as elements to reinforce national human rights efforts. 115. Comoros stressed the commitment of Cuba to human rights.  116. The Congo underlined the high standards achieved by Cuba in the areas of education and health despite the embargo. 117. Costa Rica expressed concern about the lack of independent mechanisms to investigate allegations of torture. 118. Cyprus acknowledged the acceptance by Cuba of recommendations from the previous review.  119. The Czech Republic encouraged Cuba to promote and protect human rights.  120. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea encouraged Cuba to continue with its positive efforts. 121. The Democratic Republic of the Congo acknowledged the progress made by Cuba in the areas of, inter alia, health and education. 122. Djibouti commended efforts by Cuba to create national cohesion, despite remaining challenges. 123. The Dominican Republic welcomed the high-level delegation. 124. Ecuador recognized progress in areas such as housing, rehabilitation of inmates and food sovereignty. 125. Egypt welcomed efforts by Cuba to achieve a higher quality of access to justice. 126. El Salvador highlighted the decision of Cuba to achieve all MDGs. 127. Eritrea recognized the achievements made despite the blockade. 128. Estonia recognized progress made and invited Cuba to cooperate with special procedures and treaty bodies. 129. Ethiopia commended Cuba for overcoming challenges and pursuing the development of the country. 130. Referring to the State’s signing of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), Finland asked about measures to amend the national legislation accordingly. 131. France welcomed the ratification by Cuba of CPED. 132. Gabon welcomed the country’s cooperation with the human rights mechanisms. 133. Germany remained concerned about continued restrictions on Internet access and about censorship of critical websites.  134. Ghana recognized contributions made by Cuba to education and health globally despite constraints. 135. Haiti congratulated Cuba on the presentation of its national report. 136. Honduras noted legislation to improve immigration and relations with the Cuban diaspora. 137. Hungary commended Cuba for, inter alia, the migration policy and initiatives to increase access to information. 138. India commended Cuba for ending the exit permit requirement for its citizens. 139. Indonesia encouraged Cuba to continue to engage with human rights mechanisms. 140. The Islamic Republic of Iran praised Cuba for its constructive engagement with the UPR. 141. Iraq commended efforts made by Cuba in areas such as health, education, gender equality and freedom of religion. 142. Ireland noted treaty body concerns regarding pretrial, arbitrary and indefinite detention. 143. Italy recognized progress made and encouraged Cuba to continue to reform the economic system. 144. Jamaica commended the adoption of the economic and social outline. It noted work on youth and gender issues. 145. Japan highlighted the amendment of the migration law. It expressed concern at the short-term detention of political opponents. 146. Jordan expressed appreciation for efforts to strengthen the institutional framework. It commended Cuba for spearheading international efforts regarding the right to food. 147. Kazakhstan noted the provision of information to special procedures and called on Cuba to strengthen human rights commitments. 148. Kenya acknowledged achievements in many areas and the contribution made by Cuba to the universal promotion of human rights. 149. Kuwait welcomed the State’s cooperation with international human rights institutions.  150. Kyrgyzstan welcomed the Cuban delegation. 151. Cuba said that there was no room for impunity in Cuba for those who violated human rights or the laws or rules that enshrined those rights. 152. Cuba said that arbitrary detention was not practised in Cuba. Detentions were carried out in accordance with the criminal procedure and for offences classified in criminal law. There were no clandestine secret detention centres. In Cuba, torture was not practised. 153. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic noted the achievement of enjoyment of all human rights despite constraints. It encouraged strengthened cooperation with the United Nations. 154. Lebanon welcomed Cuba’s position and support in the UPR mechanism. 155. Lesotho acknowledged challenges faced by Cuba in promoting and protecting human rights. 156. Madagascar encouraged Cuba to continue to ensure that social development objectives were taken into account in public decisions. 157. Malaysia noted the contributions of Cuba to international solidarity in the areas of health and education.  158. Maldives commended achievements in health and education and progress in gender equality.  159. Mali welcomed the cooperation with other countries on health and education. It praised the country’s literacy programmes. 160. Mauritania expressed solidarity with Cuba and called on the international community to support its development. 161. Argentina welcomed the ratification of CPED and the adoption of the regulation for employment of persons with disabilities.  162. Montenegro asked if Cuba planned to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (OP-CAT) and establish an independent national preventive mechanism. 163. Morocco welcomed achievements in human development. It noted efforts to improve penitentiary conditions. 164. Mozambique noted human rights achievements. 165. Myanmar welcomed the delegation of Cuba. 166. Equatorial Guinea expressed its support of the social justice principles of Cuba. It noted cooperation with United Nations treaty bodies. 167. Botswana welcomed the achievement of some MDGs despite decades of economic blockade. 168. The delegation noted that Cuba agreed to visits to the country from the Human Rights Council special rapporteurs, or other universal non-discriminatory mechanisms. In Cuba, arbitrary detentions and prison sentences for long periods without legal grounds occurred systematically at the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base. The economic, trade and financial blockade by the United States against Cuba was a massive, flagrant and systematic violation of the human rights of its people. 169. The delegation reiterated the commitment of Cuba to cooperating with the United Nations human rights system, the Human Rights Council and the UPR mechanism.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**   ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 170. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue and listed below will be examined by Cuba, which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-fourth session of the Human Rights Council in September 2013: 170.1. Ratify the core nternational human rights treaties to which it is not yet a party (Kazakhstan);  Ratify other international human rights treaties to which it is not yet a party (Burkina Faso); Ratify, as soon as possible, major international human rights instruments already signed (Cape Verde); 170.2. Ratify the ICESCR (Romania, Maldives, Australia, Germany, Slovenia, France, Austria);  Accede the ICESCR  bring national legislation in compliance with relevant provisions of this Covenant (Czech Republic); Promptly ratify the ICESCR (Italy);  Consider ratifying the ICESCR (Mexico); Ratify and implement the ICESCR (Canada); proceed quickly towards the ratification without reservations the ICESCR (Norway);  Ratify the ICESCR as soon as possible (Poland);  Ratify the ICESCR without any further delays (Slovakia); Ratify the ICESCR at an early stage (Japan);  Ratify and implement ICESCR without reservations or delay (Finland);170.3. Subscribe to the Optional Protocol to ICESCR (El Salvador); 170.4. Ratify the ICCPR (Chile, Estonia, Romania, Maldives, Australia, Germany, Slovenia, Montenegro, France, Tunisia);  Ratify and implement the ICCPR (Canada, Austria);  Accede the ICCPR (Switzerland, Czech Republic); Promptly ratify  the ICCPR(Italy); Consider ratifying the ICCPR (Mexico); Proceed quickly towards the ratification of ICCPR without reservations (Norway);  Ratify the ICCPR and ensure full implementation of all provisions (Hungary);  Ratify the ICCPR as soon as possible (Poland);  Ratify the ICCPR without any further delays (Slovakia); Ratify the ICCPR at an early stage (Japan); Ratify the ICCPR and take necessary measures to ensure its full implementation in the national legislation (Switzerland); Ratify and implement ICCPR without reservations or delay (Finland); Ratify the ICCPR and bring national legislation in compliance with relevant provisions of this Covenant (Czech Republic); 170.5. Ratify both the ICCPR and the ICESCR without restrictions and issue a standing invitation to the Special Rapporteurs to visit the country, especially those on human rights defenders, freedom of expression and independence of judges and lawyers (Sweden); 170.6. Ratify the Optional Protocol to ICCPR (ICCPR-OP-1) as soon as possible (Estonia); 170.7. Continue with measures carried out in order to Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Argentina); Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Montenegro); Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR as soon as possible (Estonia); Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR aiming at abolishing of the death penalty for all crimes or formalizing the de facto moratorium on the death penalty (Montenegro); 170.8. Confirm the signature of ICCPR and ICESCR without restriction to freedom of expression or assembly and take the necessary measures to incorporate them into its national legislation (Netherlands); 170.9. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, as recommended in the first cycle (Slovenia); 170.10. Consider ratifying the OP-CAT (Armenia); Access and ratify the OP-CAT (Estonia); Ratify the OP-CAT (France, Tunisia, Costa Rica); criminalize torture (Costa Rica); 170.11. Adhere the ICRMW (Honduras); Continue with the measures carried out in order to ratify the ICRMW (Argentina); 170.12. Subscribe to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (El Salvador); Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Austria); 170.13. Consider recognizing the competence of the Committee on Enforced Disappearances to receive and study communications (Uruguay); 170.14. Adhere the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Costa Rica); Ratify the Rome Statute (France, Tunisia); Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Austria); 170.15. Continue adopting new rules to widen the legislative grounds of human rights (Syrian Arab Republic); 170.16. Continue to adopt legal coverage of human rights (United Arab Emirates); 170.17. Continue to develop measures for the development of national legislation in accordance with international instruments in the field of human rights (Uzbekistan); 170.18. Continue to develop the legal and institutional framework for the promotion and protection of human rights and develop social justice (Serbia); 170.19. Continue bringing national legislation into line with changes in its economic model and in accordance with the treaties to which it is party (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 170.20. Continue measures aimed at maintaining the national legislation consistent with international human rights instruments (Belarus); 170.21. Continue developing the domestic legislation and institutional framework for the promotion and protection of human rights (Bhutan); 170.22. Further improve the legal framework for the protection and promotion of human rights in conformity with its national conditions (China); 170.23. Review legislation in conformity with international commitments (Iraq); 170.24. Integrate the CAT in the domestic legislation (France); 170.25. Intensify efforts to harmonize all legislation (including its criminal law) to the Convention on Rights of the Child (CRC) and its Optional Protocol on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, extending their protection up to 18 years (Uruguay); Review all legislation related to children to harmonize it with the CRC (Honduras); Harmonize a child’s protection legislation to international standards (Kazakhstan); 170.26. Take more active measures to promote real participation of NGOs and civil society institutions in the adoption of legislation to promote human rights (Iraq); 170.27. Continue to improve its human rights system in accordance with the will of the people (Nigeria); 170.28. Continue developing the institutional framework concerning the promotion and protection of human rights (Panama, Ukraine); 170.29. Pursue the development of its institutional framework concerning the promotion and protection of human rights (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 170.30. Consider the possibility of adopting new measures to improve its human rights protection system (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 170.31. Strengthen the legal and institutional framework for the promotion and protection of human rights and to continue expanding the social justice (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 170.32. Continue strengthening the democratic character of its institutions, laws, policies and programmes that maintain their clear popular and participatory nature (Algeria, Ecuador, Ethiopia); 170.33. Consider setting up an independent human rights commission in line with the Paris Principles (Sierra Leone); Consider the possibility of establishing a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Uruguay); Consider the possible establishment of a national human rights institution, according to the Paris Principles (Mexico); Establish a national institution for the protection of human rights in conformity with the Paris Principles (France); 170.34. Continue protecting its population from the effects of the blockade imposed by the United States of America (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 170.35. Continue to address the effects of unilateral blockade of the United States of America (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 170.36. Continue to denounce in international forums the unilateral coercive measures, in particular the inacceptable economic blockade imposed by the United States of America and continue consolidating international efforts aimed at repealing it (Ecuador); 170.37. Further strengthen its institutional framework to enable it to defend its sovereignty and protect the human rights of its people (Zimbabwe); 170.38. Continue defending the country’s independence and sovereignty (Belarus); 170.39. Persist in its efforts despite the difficulties both internal and external it has to face (Comoros); 170.40. Address the negative impacts of unilateral economic measures and natural calamities that affect the country (India); 170.41. Continue with the policy of National Reconciliation as this is the best way to prosper and for nation building (Namibia); 170.42. Continue to promote dialogue with all States, on the basis of mutual respect, sovereign equality, self-determination and the right to choose their own political, economic and social system (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 170.43. Encourage to continue promoting its commitment to dialogue on all issues and with all states, on the basis of mutual respect, sovereign equality, self-determination and recognition of the right of every people to choose their own political, economic and social system (South Sudan); 170.44. Preserve with vigour the approach of cooperation, non-politicization and respectful dialogue among all nations in terms of human rights (South Sudan); 170.45. Continue to pursue its commitment to dialogue on all issues and with all States, on the basis of mutual respect, sovereign equality, self-determination and recognition of the right of every people to choose their own political, economic and social system (Mozambique); 170.46. Promote understanding, tolerance and friendship among the peoples of the world (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Eritrea) along the ideas of peaceful co-existence and genuine cooperation and partnership (Eritrea); 170.47. Continue efforts to promote and protect the rights of all segments of the population (Nepal); 170.48. Continue its efforts to widen the protection of human rights and the security of its citizen in the country as a means of consolidating social justice (Syrian Arab Republic); 170.49. Continue achieving the widest enjoyment possible of human rights and basic freedoms (Syrian Arab Republic); 170.50. Launch new measures and initiatives to continue efforts to ensure a wider access to all of all human rights and fundamental freedom (Algeria); 170.51. Promote new actions and initiatives to continue progressing in its efforts to achieve the widest possible enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all (Turkmenistan); 170.52. Maintain and strengthen measures to enhance the promotion and protection of human rights (Bahrain); 170.53. Further ensure the enjoyment of human rights in particular in the areas of economic, social and cultural rights and the right to development (Cambodia);  170.54. Redouble all efforts to preserve the progress achieved in a number of areas such as culture, education, health and the fight against social inequality (Turkey); 170.55. Preserve the progress achieved in areas such as culture, education, health and the elimination of social inequality (Belarus); 170.56. Continue efforts to strengthen measures to enhance the promotion and protection of human rights including social, political, economic and cultural rights (Botswana); 170.57. Continue its efforts for the development and the wellbeing of its population, particularly through education and training which even some of our countries also benefit from (Comoros); 170.58. Promote and protect all human rights for all (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 170.59. Continue to enhance the interests of the people of Cuba and overcome any undue process (Ethiopia); 170.60. Continue to ensure proper representation of social development goals in public decisions (Mauritania); 170.61. Continue implementing necessary measures to guarantee the safety of its citizens and to preserve the peaceful atmosphere and internal order and confidence in both the criminal justice system and the police system (Syrian Arab Republic); 170.62. Continue to improve the Cuban political system, upholding the values of the Cuban society and the national unity, and promoting the strengthening of its democracy (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 170.63. Continue efforts to strengthen participatory democracy, as a way to ensuring participation of citizens in public affairs (Botswana); 170.64. Work through the United Nations mechanism in progressive development of the third generation of human rights, particularly the value of international solidarity (Sudan); Promote the development of third generation rights, in particular the value of international solidarity (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 170.65. Continue to support in international forums the right to self-determination and independence of peoples (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 170.66. Continue promoting initiatives in defence of international solidarity (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); Continue to support initiatives to promote international solidarity (Lebanon); 170.67. Continue to cooperate with other countries in health (Burundi, Kuwait, Ukraine); 170.68. Extend in the region the positive experience in education and health care, including through special training (Russian Federation); 170.69. Continue to promote the training and education of qualified people, especially in the sphere of health in developing countries (Tajikistan); 170.70. Continue the cooperation in health matters with the developing countries, particularly LDCs (United Republic of Tanzania); 170.71. Continue to share its experiences in the area of health (Chad); 170.72. Internationalize the “Milagro” operation to restore vision to people with ophthalmological diseases (Haiti); 170.73. Expand and share with other countries the experiences in research on vaccines for diseases affecting the world population, especially in developing countries (India); 170.74. Continue and promote the training and education of qualified people especially in the sphere of health in the developing countries, and continue promoting initiatives in defence of international solidarity (Timor-Leste); 170.75. Promote in the international level Cuban educational programmes, such as “Yes, I can” and “Yes, I can continue” (Russian Federation); 170.76. Share its experiences in teachers and professors’ training, and in adults’ education (Chad); 170.77. Promote in the international scene the literacy and post-literacy Cuban programs named “Yo sí puedo” “Ya puedo leer y escribir” and “Yo sí puedo seguir”(Haiti); 170.78. Continue its efforts to develop national information and education strategy which encourages a culture of disaster risk reduction (Yemen); 170.79. Further develop national information and public education strategy that encourages the culture of disaster risk perception (Oman); 170.80. Prioritize the protection of the right to life of Cubans in the fight against disasters and share its experiences with the countries of the region (Haiti); 170.81. Provide humanitarian assistance at the extent possible to neighbouring countries which need assistance because of man-made or natural catastrophes (Russian Federation); 170.82. Share experiences in disaster risk management with other countries (Sierra Leone); 170.83. Provide support to countries requesting assistance in case of natural disasters and other ravages of nature (Bangladesh); 170.84. Continue working against the catastrophic consequences of natural phenomena (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 170.85. Further strengthen the capacity to counter natural disasters (China); 170.86. To keep, as a priority for the country, the protection of the right to life of all Cubans in confronting the various dangers of disaster (Kuwait); 170.87. Continue efforts to prevent illicit drugs consumption and trafficking, which are a remaining problem without a social impact in Cuba (Egypt); 170.88. Continue with overall education regarding the rights of children with developing the preventive assistance concerning the use of drugs (Serbia); 170.89. Maintain the priority given to women and children (Senegal); 170.90. Continue implementing measures that make prevail the best interest of the child when the time comes for decision making (Panama); 170.91. Continue to pay particular attention to the protection of the rights of children and strengthen measures for the full realization of the rights of children with disabilities (Serbia); 170.92. Continue policies to strengthen the rights of children (Viet Nam); 170.93. Continue promoting efforts to support the youth, particularly in the area of education and employment, and set up programmes and suitable mechanisms to encourage their effective participation in the society (Qatar); 170.94. Strengthen community management to solve problems of groups at risk and prioritize the attention to young people living in rural areas (Tajikistan); 170.95. Continue to take measures in order to support young people in terms of education and employment (Uzbekistan); 170.96. Continue providing specialized assistance to young people (Pakistan); 170.97. Intensify its efforts to collect more disaggregated data in different sectors (Morocco); 170.98. Increase constructive cooperation with United Nations human rights mechanisms (Russian Federation); Continue the international cooperation with the United Nations human rights machinery (State of Palestine); Continue cooperation with the United Nations human rights mechanisms (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); Continue to positively engage the United Nations human rights mechanisms and instruments (Zimbabwe); 170.99. Continue to contribute to the strengthening of the system of United Nations human rights on the basis of dialogue, non-politicization and cooperation (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 170.100. Continue to defend the cooperative approach to non-politicization and respectful dialogue in the field of human rights (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); Continue to defend approach of cooperation to mutual respect and non-politicization of human rights issues (Eritrea); 170.101. Seek assistance and technical expertise from the OHCHR to develop a common core document so as to streamline treaty reporting (Maldives); 170.102. Continue to support the UPR as a mechanism for respectful dialogue and exchange (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 170.103. Disseminate the results of the UPR and hold periodical comprehensive consultations, including with civil society sectors (Colombia); 170.104. Widely publish the outcome of this UPR and make regular and inclusive consultations with civil society an integral part of the follow-up to the UPR (Czech Republic); 170.105. Continue its cooperation and interaction with the Council and its mechanisms and reinforce its achievements in the area of human rights (Congo); 170.106. Fulfil obligations to the human rights mechanisms, including submission of outstanding reports and approving pending visits of Special Rapporteurs (Sierra Leone); 170.107. Extend/Issue a standing invitation to the Special Procedures of the Human Rights Council (Austria, Spain, Hungary, Montenegro); 170.108. Work with the United Nations special procedures and maintain its willingness to cooperate with these mechanisms (El Salvador); 170.109. Take all necessary measures to facilitate the visits requested by United Nations special procedures without further delay (Finland); 170.110. Respond favourably to requests to visit by the special procedures and extend to them an open invitation (France); 170.111. Invite as soon as possible the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (Spain); 170.112. Materialize the prearranged visit with the Special Rapporteur on the question of Torture (Mexico); 170.113. Accept the request for a country visit made in 2011 by the Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association (Chile); 170.114. Continue its efforts to ensure full equality for all its citizens (South Africa); 170.115. Continue deploying its best efforts for the eradication of stereotypes, prejudices and negative attitudes of patriarchal, racial and gender-based nature (Peru); 170.116. Continue to implement measures to eliminate gender stereotypes in the national idiosyncrasy (Turkey, Viet Nam); 170.117. Take measures in order to reduce gender stereotypes regarding the roles and the responsibilities of women in the family and in the society (Armenia); 170.118. Intensify awareness campaigns to combat gender stereotypes (Brazil); 170.119. Continue its efforts to combat prejudice and negative racial stereotyping (Argentina); 170.120. Continue to enhance women’s rights and intensify awareness campaigns to combat stereotypes against women (Ghana); 170.121. Continue promoting a gender perspective(Turkey); Continue applying a gender perspective in its national policies (Nicaragua); 170.122. Continue to maintain its significant achievements in the empowerment of women (Nigeria); 170.123. Continue to improve its policies to protect and promote the rights of women and their empowerment (Bangladesh); 170.124. Continue its efforts to promote equality between women and men (Panama); 170.125. Continue to promote gender equality to ensure a level playing field for all women in all wards of the society (Singapore); 170.126. Increase efforts on gender equality (El Salvador); 170.127. Deepen studies on gender perspective and prevent against any kind of discrimination in the media (Myanmar);  170.128. Continue working to achieve a greater women’s leadership in agricultural cooperatives (Myanmar, Viet Nam); 170.129. Add more content on gender equality and human rights to master’s degree and courses of officials and law enforcement officers (Pakistan); 170.130. Continue the existing strengthening of the legal and institutional framework to combat racial discrimination and prejudice (South Africa); 170.131. Continue to promote the social inclusion and rights of its LGBT community and that the country’s experience in this regard is actively shared with countries in the region and globally (Norway); 170.132. Strengthen publicity and awareness campaigns aimed at increasing knowledge among the population about the rights of LGBT people (South Africa); 170.133. Further expand the opportunities for dialogue on sexual orientation and gender identity (Brazil); 170.134. Promote efforts to abolish the death penalty (Argentina); Consider abolishing the death penalty (Honduras); abolish the death penalty (France); abolish the death penalty for all crimes (Switzerland); 170.135. Remove the death penalty from its criminal statutes and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR (Australia) 170.136. Consider the adoption of a de jure moratorium on executions, as a first step towards the abolition of the death penalty (Belgium); 170.137. Maintain the moratorium on executions and consider moving towards abolition of death penalty (Italy); 170.138. Allow for independent investigations into the circumstances surrounding the deaths of Oswaldo Paya and Harold Cepero (United States of America); Carry out an independent investigation of the car accident of Oswaldo Payá (Czech Republic); 170.139. Implement legal safeguards to ensure protection of human rights defenders, including journalists, against abuse of provisions for criminal prosecution (Czech Republic) and release all political prisoners (Belgium, Czech Republic, Slovenia,); 170.140. Ensure that prisoners or detainees are treated with dignity and humanity, with due consideration for the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (Canada); 170.141. Maintain systematic and fluid relationships with the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 170.142. Allow ICRC to gain access to prisons (Sweden); 170.143. Work to achieve additional progress in implementing the programme “Educate Your Child” which aims at connecting the prisoners with their children who are less than 6 years and their families (Sudan); 170.144. Continue the “Educate your Child” programme in the prisons (Dominican Republic); 170.145. Continue to ensure, as established, individual and collective religious assistance to those inmates who request it (Dominican Republic); 170.146. Further raise the quality of education on human rights for law enforcement officials and those directly involved with inmates (Pakistan); 170.147. Share experiences and best practices with regard to the treatment of prisoners (Bolivia (Plurinational Republic of)); 170.148. Continue to promote the preventive approach in education and social reintegration to avoid delinquency (Dominican Republic); 170.149. Continue the policy incorporating inmates to education and job-training at different educational levels (Dominican Republic); 170.150. Take appropriate measures to establish a mechanism for monitoring detention places (Kazakhstan); 170.151. Continue the restoration of the prisons’ infrastructure, particularly in the context of the Master Plan for Investment in the System of Prisons (Morocco); 170.152. Increase effort being carried out to combat violence against women (Timor-Leste); 170.153. Enhance efforts aimed at quality performance in the area of administration of justice (Syrian Arab Republic); Strengthen the efforts to reach a qualitative superior performance in the administration of justice (Viet Nam); 170.154. Continue to apply measures aimed at achieving higher level of quality in the administration of justice (Colombia); 170.155. Implement the adopted investment plan for the judicial system, in order to improve the situation of detainees (Cape Verde); 170.156. Strengthen the principle of legality with an emphasis in due process in conformity with international human rights norms (El Salvador); 170.157. Keep the direct fight against corruption as a means of ensuring the legality and trust in government and judicial institutions (Turkmenistan); 170.158. Maintain the frontal fight against corruption (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 170.159. Take steps to strengthen the right to a fair trial and improve prison conditions through adherence to: the Basic Principles on the Independence of the Judiciary and the Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers; the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; and the Standard Minimum Rules on the Treatment of Prisoners (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 170.160. Guarantee the independence of the judiciary and ensure the right to a fair trial as outlined by the Basic Principles on the Independence of the Judiciary (Austria); 170.161. Improve transparency and due process in the criminal justice system by ensuring fair and public hearings within a reasonable timeframe, ensuring anyone arrested is promptly informed of the reasons for arrest and ensuring that defendants have access to effective representation by their defence counsel, functioning fairly and without undue constraint (Canada); 170.162. Amend the Law of Criminal Procedure in order to avoid the cases of indefinite extension of the preliminary investigation (Belgium); 170.163. Ensure access to an independent lawyer to all persons deprived of their liberty (Belgium); 170.164. Promote the fair justice principles consistent with international standards, especially by reviewing the legislation and implementation of pre-trial detention (Italy); 170.165. Adopt the measures necessary to guarantee the right of any person deprived of liberty to have access to an immediate remedy to challenge the legality of that detention (Ireland); 170.166. Maintain its policy of respect and tolerance of all religious without discrimination, including the right not to profess any religion (Nicaragua); Continue (India) its policy of respect and tolerance of all religious without discrimination, in particular the right to choose one’s own convictions (India); 170.167. Continue the country’s policy in promoting the full religious freedom of all citizens (Viet Nam); 170.168. Further increase popular participation in elections and decision making procedures (Uganda); Continue to expand popular participation in electoral and decision making procedures (Iran (Islamic Republic of)) 170.169. Promote greater and effective use of the media to promote the rights of children (India); 170.170. Consolidate access to information and culture of all people (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 170.171. Remove restrictions on freedom of expression notably concerning the connection to the Internet (Romania); Reconsider all the laws that criminalize or restrict the right to freedom of expression and the right of internet freedom (Estonia); Lift restrictions on the rights to freedom of expression that are not in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and to ensure affordable and unhindered access to the internet for all (Hungary); 170.172. Allow freedoms of expression, association and assembly, and allow human rights associations to obtain a legal status through inclusive and official registration (Spain); 170.173. Lift the restrictions that hinder free expression and ensure that human rights defenders and independent journalists are not victims of intimidations or arbitrary prosecutions and detentions (Switzerland); 170.174. End measures to restrict freedom of expression and assembly including short-term detentions and the use of criminal charges such as “precriminal social dangerousness”, “contempt” and “resistance” (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 170.175. Repeal legislation relating to so-called “pre-criminal social dangerousness”, as provided for in Articles 72, 73 and 74 of the Cuban Penal Code (Ireland); 170.176. Eliminate or cease enforcing laws impeding freedom of expression (United States of America); 170.177. Guarantee the freedom of expression and peaceful assembly, as well as the free activity of human rights defenders, to independent journalists and political opponents (France); 170.178. Enhance the protection of freedom of expression and thought, including, dissenting political opinions, and ensure free access to information for all, inter alia through the Internet (Italy); 170.179. Take further measures to improve freedom of expression by allowing for an independent media and improving access to information through public access to the internet by taking advantage of the recent investment in the fibre optic network (Canada); 170.180. Take effective measures to ensure the full realization of the rights to freedom of expression, including on internet, assembly and association (Czech Republic); 170.181. Strengthen the exercise of freedom of expression, assembly, association and participation (Eritrea); 170.182. Guarantee a safe, free and independent environment for journalists and ensure that all cases of attacks against them are investigated by independent and impartial bodies (Austria); 170.183. Put an end to repression, investigate acts of repudiation and protect all persons who are the targets of intimidation or violence (Netherlands); 170.184. Liberate immediately and unconditionally all the prisoners held in temporary detention or sentenced in connection with exercising their freedom of opinion and expression as well as freedom of assembly and association (Poland); 170.185. Take steps to protect and promote the freedom of expression and association of all peaceful defenders of human rights in the country (Norway); 170.186. Ensure that all living in Cuba can fully enjoy their rights to freedom of expression, association and peaceful assembly (Poland); 170.187. Release Alan Gross and imprisoned journalists such as Jose Antonio Torres immediately (United States of America); 170.188. Discontinue the limitations on civil society activities, including the short-term detention of political activists (Australia); 170.189. Refrain from the harassment, intimidation and arbitrary detention of human rights activities (Germany); 170.190. Halt short-term detentions, harassments and other repressive measures against human rights defenders and journalists and implement legal safeguards to ensure their protection against abuse of provisions for criminal prosecution (Hungary); 170.191. Take necessary measures to guarantee the rights to peaceful assembly and association in conformity with the law and the international standards (Switzerland); 170.192. Reduce government influence and control over the internet as part of a broader commitment to freedom of expression (Australia); 170.193. Put an end to online censorship (Germany); 170.194. Take steps to ensure the establishment of an unrestricted access to the internet for all, including by making use of the existing underwater high speed broadband cable (Germany); 170.195. Continue to develop policies aimed at improving information infrastructure for the benefit of Cuban society (Philippines); 170.196. Make the Internet widely available and accessible to the general public, given the recent technological arrangements with country’s partners, in recognition of the Internet as a major driving force in accelerating development in its various forms and as an important tool for exercising human rights, in particular with regards to the right to freedom of expression as well as freedom of information (Slovakia); 170.197. Enhance the quality and access to information and communication technologies (Sri Lanka); 170.198. Improve access to the Internet (Japan); 170.199. Consolidate access to information and culture for all people (Tajikistan); 170.200. Increase the quality in the social use and access to information and communication technologies (Turkmenistan); 170.201. Continue the expansion of broad band connectivity to Internet and confront the limitations imposed by the blockade (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 170.202. Develop policies to improve information infrastructure for the benefit of the Cuban society (Pakistan); 170.203. Continue increasing the quality in the social use and access to information and communication technologies (Malaysia); 170.204. Continue to use the information and social media to promote the culture of human rights and, in particular, the rights of the child (Saudi Arabia); 170.205. Further strengthen protection to ensure the non-dismissal of workers diagnosed with HIV/AIDS (Kazakhstan); 170.206. Continue to promote economic and social development (United Arab Emirates); 170.207. Continue its measures in favour of economic, social and cultural rights (Senegal); 170.208. Pursue the strengthening of its economic and social development (Somalia); 170.209. Continue to promote its poor people socio-economic policies for the improvement of its people (Zimbabwe); 170.210. Continue to implement the current projects and socio-economic development programs (Belarus); Continue implementing current socio-economic development projects and programmes for the promotion and protection of all human rights (Somalia); 170.211. Continue the practice of implementing the programmes aimed at further advancing the improved social welfare of the population, in particular the vulnerable ones (Cambodia); 170.212. Pursue all efforts to preserve the progress in culture, education, health and fight against social inequality (Egypt); 170.213. Continue its efforts to guarantee progress and improvement of  the Cuban society  as well as its sustainable development , the improvement of their living standard and progress towards a more just, free, independent and equitable society ( Algeria ); 170.214. Maintain updating the economic model, as a way to preserve the gains achieved by the Cuban people and to continue developing the broad potentials of Cuba and human resources (Bahrain); 170.215. Further improve the social security system and continue to assist vulnerable groups (China); 170.216. Continue its national efforts to focus on the quality and sustainability of development targets (Indonesia); 170.217. Continue strengthening its economic and social development (Jordan, Panama); 170.218. Continue its efforts to promote economic, cultural and social rights (Equatorial Guinea); 170.219. Make greater efforts to promote economic and social rights in a manner conducive to the furtherance of rights in the fields of labour, education, health and housing (Saudi Arabia); 170.220. Increase, within its limited resources, its capacity to achieve the MDGs and the right to development to all its people (Namibia); 170.221. Continue guaranteeing the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights in order to reach the MDGs (Nicaragua); 170.222. Make additional efforts in the process of achieving the MDGs by 2015 (Qatar); 170.223. Further emphasize the quality and sustainability of the achieved targets and progress towards attaining the remaining MDG goals (Thailand); 170.224. Continue the efforts to ensure the sustained implementation of the MDGs (Uzbekistan); 170.225. Further maintain national efforts to ensure compliance and stability of the MDGs (Azerbaijan); 170.226. Ensure the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights, with the purpose of attaining the MDGs (Kyrgyzstan); 170.227. Ensure the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights, in the context of the attainment of the MDGs, which Cuba has mostly met (Mozambique); 170.228. Continue its efforts to implement the MDGs at the national level (Angola); 170.229. Continue its efforts to achieve the MDGs on the 2015 horizon (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 170.230. Continue efforts to ensure enjoyment by all persons of economic, social and cultural rights with a view to achieving the MDGs (Lebanon); 170.231. Maintain national efforts to ensure compliance and stability of the MDGs (Myanmar); 170.232. Continue to implement measures to facilitate public access to adequate housing (Nepal, Sri Lanka); 170.233. Continue to implement measures to facilitate public access to adequate housing (Oman); 170.234. Continue addressing, as a priority, the enjoyment by all people of the right to food and to ensure food security (Sri Lanka); Continue its efforts towards achieving the right to food and food security (Sudan); Continue ensuring the enjoyment of the right to food and food security for all (Thailand); 170.235. Expand the food possibilities of the population through an agricultural system of higher productivity and production (Oman); 170.236. Continue to ensure food security for the elderly, persons with disabilities and persons at risk (Sri Lanka); 170.237. Expand the food possibilities of the population through an agricultural system of higher productivity and production (Sri Lanka); 170.238. Continue the implementation of the national program on access of the population to high quality medical services (Russian Federation); 170.239. Maintain, as a permanent priority, the quality improvement in public health of the country (Somalia); 170.240. Continue guaranteeing free and universal access to public health (State of Palestine); Continue the provision of free and universal access to public health (Myanmar); Continue ensuring free and universal access to public health (Timor-Leste, Jordan); 170.241. Maintain as a permanent priority the increase of the public health quality in the country (Togo); 170.242. Keep raising the quality of public health in the country, as a permanent priority (Bahrain, Turkey); 170.243. Maintain the quality of public health of the country as a priority (Djibouti); 170.244. Continue to improve its health system and training for health personnel (Ghana); 170.245. Step up efforts to guarantee the right of health of its citizens (Indonesia); 170.246. Continue improving the Mother and Child Care Program (Myanmar); 170.247. Continue developing the Help Line services to prevent drug use and for sex education (Dominican Republic); 170.248. Keep the systematic and coordinated work with the “National Commission for Drug Control and Prevention” and continue developing the “Help Line” services for the prevention of drug use and for sexual education with a gender perspective (El Salvador); 170.249. Strengthen the prevention of HIV/AIDS, sexual and reproductive health and sexual diversity (Dominican Republic); 170.250. Continue to promote awareness campaigns on the question of HIV/AIDS and the rights of people who suffer from it (Mauritania); 170.251. Continue ensuring, through the Vaccination Program, the immunization coverage of the Cuban population (United Republic of Tanzania); 170.252. Continue to improve progressively maternal and child health programs to ensure systematic and continuous control over their situation across the country (Algeria); 170.253. Continue attaching its priority towards care for the elderly in order to ensure the quality of life of this group of the population (Brunei Darussalam, Togo); 170.254. Implement and develop programs related to health and social welfare for the elderly, especially those aimed at further expanding the availability of medicines and to improve elderly health monitoring (Ukraine); 170.255. Continue giving special priority to the elderly care within the Cuban society to ensure the quality of life of this group of the population (United Republic of Tanzania); 170.256. Consolidate programs to benefit and protect the elderly (Bolivia (Plurinational Republic of)); 170.257. Adopt new measures to deal with the growing aging of the population (Djibouti); 170.258. Implement and develop social assistance programmes for the elderly (El Salvador); 170.259. Continue guaranteeing the access to cultural values in all its manifestations (Nicaragua); 170.260. Continue to protect traditional culture and artistic heritage (China); 170.261. Continue efforts to defend the identity, cultural heritage preservation, promotion of creativity, artistic and literary production and art appreciation (Egypt); 170.262. Protect and promote cultural rights in order to ensure access for all Cubans to cultural values in all its manifestations (Kyrgyzstan);  170.263. Continue to ensure universal access to quality education for all and to maintain if not improve its healthcare system to the continued benefit of its people (Singapore); 170.264. Continue developing its policies to ensure the best quality in the sphere of education (South Africa); 170.265. Continue its work to achieve the highest quality at all levels of education (Syrian Arab Republic); 170.266. Continue prioritizing the promotion of the right to education for all (Belarus); 170.267. Continue promoting the respect for human rights, welfare and development of its people through education (Pakistan); 170.268. Pursue the policies that give priority to the promotion of the right to education for all (Burundi); 170.269. Continue the endeavours that have been made to keep all persons informed and aware of the possibility of gaining access to educational and cultural institutions (Saudi Arabia); 170.270. Pursue policies that give priority to the promotion of the right to education for all (Mauritania); 170.271. Continue its efforts in human rights education (Philippines); 170.272. Continue to promote and enhance human rights education in the country (Ghana); 170.273. Continue the effective realization of the right of education, including human rights education, in the country (Armenia); 170.274. Continue its efforts to create awareness among the public about the human rights instruments to which Cuba is a State party (Sri Lanka); 170.275. Further intensify its efforts in the training of the State’s authorities and the public in general regarding international human rights standards (Malaysia, Turkmenistan, Pakistan); 170.276. Promote human rights teaching in schools (Djibouti); 170.277. Continue to provide social security protection to mothers of children with severe disabilities (Nigeria); 170.278. Further strengthening social security programs for mothers of children with severe disabilities (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 170.279. Continue to strengthen measures focused on employment for persons, particularly women, with disabilities (Trinidad and Tobago); 170.280. Continue its work to achieve greater access to employment for women with disabilities (Bangladesh); 170.281. Promote the consolidation of the role of women with disabilities, without prejudice and stereotypes (Ecuador); 170.282. Strengthen measures aimed at respecting the rights of people with disabilities, particularly children (Belarus); 170.283. Continue to implement the Brasilia rules regarding accessibility for persons with disabilities to the justice system (Brazil); 170.284. Effectively achieve greater access to employment to persons with disabilities, particularly women (Cyprus); 170.285. Keep studying the legal norms on the forms of employment of persons with disabilities and update them when necessary (Ecuador); 170.286. Broaden the promotion of the use of language that is more in accordance with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, in particular continue advancing in the access to information through Braille, sign language, among others (Ecuador); 170.287. Consolidate specialized measures aimed at strengthening the rights of children with disabilities (Eritrea); 170.288. Continue to work on raising the training of human resources and teachers to facilitate access to education for pupils with special needs (Lesotho);  170.289. Continue to give particular priority to Special Education for children who require highly specialized care (Maldives); 170.290. Enhance the training of athletes with disabilities and further promote their participation in international sporting events (Lesotho); 170.291. Continue to encourage the training of athletes with disabilities and to further promote their participation in international sporting events (Myanmar); 170.292. Adopt legislative and administrative measures that would give greater coverage to the protection of the rights of refugees, asylum seekers and stateless persons (Niger). 171. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English only]   Composition of the delegation The delegation of Cuba was headed by H.E. Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Cuba and composed of the following members: • H.E. Mr. Rafael Pino Bécquer, Deputy Attorney General of the Republic of Cuba; • H.E. Mr. Oscar Manuel Silvera Martínez, Vice-President of the Popular Supreme Court; • H.E. Mrs. Rosa Fernanda Charró Ruiz, Deputy Minister, Ministry of Justice; • H.E. Mrs. Anayansi Rodríguez Camejo, Ambassador, Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of Cuba to the United Nations Office at Geneva and other International Organisations in Switzerland; • H.E. Mrs. María del Carmen Herrera Caseiro, Ambassador of Cuba to New Zealand; • Mr. Pedro Luis Pedroso Cuesta, Director of Multilateral Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mrs. Miriam Lau, Director for Foreign Affairs and Communication, Ministry of Labour and Social Security; • Mrs. Zuleica Romay Guerra, President of the Cuban Book Institute; • Mr. Ernesto Gómez Díaz, Adviser to the Minister of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Luis Alberto Amorós Núñez, Counsellor, Multilateral Affairs Division, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Alejandro Castillo Santana, Counsellor, Permanent Mission of Cuba to the United Nations Office at Geneva and other International Organisations in Switzerland; • Mrs. Rebeca Hernández Toledano, Counsellor, Information and Communication Division, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Manuel Vázquez Sejido, Legal Advisor, National Center for Sexual Education, Ministry of Health; • Mr. Marco Polo Vega, Official, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mrs. Rosa Miriam Elizarde, Official, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Frank Díaz Díaz, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of Cuba to the United Nations Office at Geneva and other International Organisations in Switzerland; • Mr. Pablo Berti Oliva, First Secretary, Multilateral Affairs Division, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Juan Antonio Quintanilla Román, Third Secretary, Permanent Mission of Cuba to the United Nations Office at Geneva and other International Organisations in Switzerland; • Mr. Yusnier Romero Puente, Third Secretary, Permanent Mission of Cuba to the United Nations Office at Geneva and other International Organisations in Switzerland; • Mrs. Yumirka Fernández Palacios, Third Secretary, Permanent Mission of Cuba to the United Nations Office at Geneva and other International Organisations in Switzerland; • Mrs. Janet Román Arredondo, Attaché, Permanent Mission of Cuba to the United Nations Office at Geneva and other International Organisations in Switzerland.     