Distr.: General 4 April 2014 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-sixth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Dominican Republic * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.14-12966 *1412966* 
Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–97 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–40 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 41–97 7 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 98–99 14  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 24 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its eighteenth session from 27 January to 7 February 2014. The review of the Dominican Republic was held at the 15th meeting on 5 February 2014. The delegation of the Dominican Republic was headed by Alejandra Liriano de la Cruz, Vice Minister of Foreign Relations. At its 18th meeting held on 7 February 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on the Dominican Republic. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of the Dominican Republic: Gabon, India and Peru. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of the Dominican Republic: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/DOM/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/DOM/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/DOM/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, the Czech Republic, Germany, Liechtenstein, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Spain and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, was transmitted to the Dominican Republic through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR). I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. In the introductory remarks, the delegation of the Dominican Republic presented its compliments to the distinguished Members of the Human Rights Council and the Working Group in the presentation of its follow-up second-cycle report, and extended a greeting to the States represented, international organizations and NGOs present. 6. Regarding the Dominican domestic legal framework, the delegation reported that since 2010, the State had been governed by a new Constitutional text which ensured more broadly fundamental rights, including civil, political, economic, social and cultural, collective and environmental. It also noted the constitutional block, which consisted of provisions of equal hierarchy emanating from the Constitution, constitutional law and international law. 7. The delegation mentioned a number of laws and regulations regarding development and the rights of persons with disabilities, and referred to several normative advances such as: the amendment to the Dominican Penal Code (addressing aspects such as crimes against humanity, domestic violence, feminicide, forced disappearance, racial segregation and slavery); the ratification of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT; in December 2011); adherence to the Protocol to the American Convention on Human Rights to Abolish the Death Penalty (December 2011). It also stated that, while the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict (OP-CRC-AC) was pending signature of approval by the Senate, the Deputy Chamber had sent International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention No. 169 (1989) concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries to the Senate for approval, and the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (ICCPR-OP 2) was being examined. 8. In relation to institutional progress, the delegation referred to, inter alia, the creation of the Human Rights Unit of the Attorney General’s Office, the election of the Ombudsperson, and the establishment of the Dominican Constitutional Court, in order to ensure the supremacy and protection of constitutional rules, the principles of international law and fundamental rights and freedoms. 9. The delegation reported institutional advances in both the health and the education system, including the programme for early childhood care “Quisqueya Empieza Contigo”, which would have an effect on more than 90,000 children aged up to 5 years and their families. 10. Changes within the Organic Act on the National Police were highlighted and it was explained that for specific cases of excessive use of force, discrimination and corruption, independent commissions would be established to evaluate the actions of law enforcement officers. The draft bill also laid down minimum rules for the use of force, in line with the basic principles that should govern it. 11. At the recommendation from the first cycle of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Colombia, Germany and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the delegation reported that the Dominican prison system continued to develop, and there were currently 17 correctional centres for more than 10,000 inmates. Joint work was being carried out to integrate prisons operating under the old system into the new system, and the ultimate goal of reintegrating persons deprived of liberty once they have served their sentence. 12. The delegation made observations about a recent Constitutional Court ruling concerning an amparo legal action that had attracted the attention of the international community because of the effect it could have on the rights of those born to foreign parents under irregular conditions living in the Dominican Republic. 13. The delegation stressed that the different opinions and recommendations had been listened to and the legal alternatives available studied in depth, and that, on that basis, the Government had worked to provide the best solution to the challenges faced by the Dominican Republic regarding the registration and documentation of its citizens and the immigration control of foreign citizens. 14. Under article 184 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Tribunal is “to ensure the supremacy of the Constitution, defence of the constitutional order and the protection of fundamental rights” and that its decisions “are final and irrevocable and constitute binding precedent for the public powers and all State organs”. 15. The Government had expressed its respect for the Court’s decision and its independence, and had abided by the ruling from the strictest respect for the country’s institution. However, at the same time, President Danilo Medina had expressed the Government’s firm resolution to preserve fundamental rights and the rights acquired by all people living in the Dominican Republic. Since the beginning of his administration, the President and his Government had been committed ensuring modern and transparent management of migration and facilitating the issuance of documentation to its nationals, with the aim of responding to the historical shortcomings afflicting the country. 16. Aware of the need to respond to those shortcomings, action on which had been postponed for decades, and that the ruling had brought the issue to the attention of the international community, the Government had launched, in record time, the most ambitious and comprehensive plan on regularization in the history of the country. The objective of that plan was to document and ensure regular status for all persons living in Dominican Republic territory, thus protecting their fundamental rights and reducing their vulnerability. In just three months, a clear road map had been established and actions initiated that should provide a response to the different documentation requirements presented in the country affecting both nationals and foreigners. The response would be comprehensive, inclusive and consistent with international standards. The process was being carried out with full respect for the laws and institutions of the Dominican Republic, but also of international human rights law. 17. The plan consisted of two pillars. The first pillar was the national plan for the regularization of foreigners in irregular migration situations, which would have a positive effect on the conditions of foreigners residing irregularly in the country. The plan provided for the possibility that the foreigners in irregular situation could be granted one of the immigration statuses set out under the law, according to the circumstances of each individual, provided they meet the requirements set for them. 18. Under that plan alone, the Dominican Republic could regularize in the next 14 months the migration status of thousands of people from over 100 countries who found themselves in an irregular situation in the country, and thus end their uncertainty and irregularity.  Only those cases that related to people who had not been properly documented to date, and who therefore must now process their corresponding status according to their situation, would be handled under those regularization or documentation procedures. 19. From the first week of February 2014, local province offices would be operational throughout the territory to service both the beneficiaries of the regularization process and those seeking to benefit. In order to ensure fairness and transparency, each of the cases filed would be studied individually, according to clear requirements, under expedited procedures and at minimum cost. 20. The delegation stated that the Government was ensured that no person with Dominican nationality would be stripped of it. That was why the second pillar announced by the Government was to submit to Congress a law to resolve the irregular situation of the children of undocumented immigrants registered in Dominican Republic and their descendants. 21. The Government was committed to allocating sufficient human, technical and material resources to developing the two pillars of the plan as quickly as possible and with full guarantees for the State and those affected. Among those affected were irregular immigrants working and studying in the country, to whom the Government had promised to give priority in granting work and study visas. 22. The target population would be duly informed of the plan through a comprehensive programme of dissemination starting in February 2014. The Government would have the support of civil society, churches, community organizations and other institutions, both in the process of the accompaniment and in the process of the identification of the beneficiaries of the plan. The Government had shown its readiness for the international community to observe and collaborate in the process. 23. Through Presidential Decree No. 327-13 of 29 November 2013, the Dominican Republic had ensured that deportations would be suspended during the implementation of the regularization process for those who chose to benefit from the plan. The authorities were strictly observing that decree. 24. The Dominican Republic was not the only country facing major challenges in migration planning and documentation, and it has taken advantage of the many experiences and contributions of other countries, which had allowed the Dominican Republic to build a coherent and effective road map that would hopefully also be valuable for other countries in similar situations. 25. Referring to the implementation of the recommendations made in 2009 by the Holy See, Italy, Spain, Slovenia and Uruguay, the delegation stated that the drafting of a provision to combat child abuse continued through the Guide on Comprehensive Health Care for Children and Adolescents Victims of Violence and Abuse, and that a strategic framework proposing a road map for making the Dominican Republic free from child labour by 2020 and from its worst forms by 2015 was being implemented. 26. The Dominican Republic had started implementing multiple programmes to prevent teenage pregnancy through the National Commission for the Prevention of Domestic Violence, with the support of departments of the Ministry of Health, Education and Youth, and the Office of the First Lady and the Office of the Vice President. 27. In accordance with the recommendations of Canada from the first cycle regarding the rights of persons with disabilities, the Dominican Republic had signed agreements aimed at their protection, and had carried out an intensive campaign in 2013 to promote their social inclusion, together with workshops aimed at their insertion into the productive national labour market. 28. A concern about that topic had been raised by the delegation previously in the intervention of the Dominican Republic during the 51st Commission for Social Development held in February 2013 at the United Nations Headquarters in New York, regarding the situation of disabled persons who were not yet reflected as vulnerable group in the area of HIV/AIDS at the United Nations, which should be done in order to increase international cooperation in combating HIV/AIDS and helping persons who were affected with the disease. 29. Taking into account the previous recommendations of Azerbaijan, Chile, Cuba, Egypt, the Holy See, Italy, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Norway and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the delegation noted that the protection of women was enshrined in its Constitution of 2010, and that there were advances regarding the rights of women, including related to the right to equality in political participation. The Dominican Republic had women deputies and senators, mayors, councilors and, for the second time, a woman has been elected as Vice President. 30. Regarding racial discrimination, in accordance with the recommendations of Algeria, Belgium, Ghana, Nigeria and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the delegation stated that the Government had been implementing a series of measures, such as the Attorney General’s resolutions aimed at preventing any discrimination against the access of persons to court and to prosecute all forms of discrimination in social services throughout the country. 31. The Special Prosecutor’s Office to Combat Trafficking and Smuggling in Persons was created in 2013 as one of the efforts to combat those crimes, and all members of the Public Prosecution Service were instructed to take immediate and forceful action against pimping and human trafficking. 32. Regarding the right to social security and an adequate standard of living, the delegation reported the continued hard work aimed at the elimination of poverty and food insecurity of the most vulnerable. From 2012, the central Government had provided for the implementation of various affirmative actions, including the merger of Progressing Programme and the Community Technology centres, calling the resulting project “Progress with Solidarity”, with the aim of taking more than 400,000 households out of extreme poverty, raise 1.5 million poor to the middle class and ensure 200,000 new families coverage with the Solidarity Card. 33. The country had had the privilege of being recognized at the end of 2013 by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations as one of the 20 countries which in 2012 had had significant success in fighting hunger and in complying with Millennium Development Goal 1. 34. As to the recommendations made by the delegations of Cuba and Colombia, the delegation reported that the health sector was currently undergoing reform and modernization, which resulted in the implementation of 2012 Plan, based on the lines of action set out in the National Development Strategy, the Millennium Development Goals, the 10-Year Health Plan, the National Multi-Year Plan for the Public Sector 2011–2014, the Strategic Health Agenda, international commitments and the strategic agenda of the National Health Council and the operational plans made by each branch of the institution. 35. The Plan’s strategies and interventions were aimed at meeting public health needs and focused mainly on: maternal mortality, infant mortality, vaccine preventable diseases, dengue, malaria, tuberculosis, HIV, and zoonoses. The Plan was based on strengthening primary health care, by ensuring effective immunization coverage levels and access to medicines for the population. Thirteen per cent of the 2012 budget for the Plan was earmarked for Haitian people, regardless of their immigration status, and covered services in the Dominican health centres. 36. The delegation referred to the increase in affiliations to the Social Security System and the Old Age, Disability and Survivors of the Contributory Insurance Scheme, together with the increase in the incorporation of workers from the informal sector in the Social Security System (by 122.7 per cent as of February 2013).  37. The delegation mentioned measures to ensure access of all children and adolescents to different public schools, without the presentation of an identity document, ensuring enrolment of foreign children regardless of their immigration status. It gave details on the National Literacy Plan “Quisqueya Aprende Contigo”, which aimed to teach reading and writing to all people over 15 years old under equal conditions, in order to bring the illiteracy rate among the young and adult population to zero in a period of two years. 38. Great progress had been achieved with the provision granting 4 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) to the annual budget of the Ministry of Education, at the request of Dominican society in 2012, in line with the General Education Act and the amendments thereto and in compliance with the 10-year plan for education previously cited during the 2009 UPR. It added that 0.5 per cent of GDP had been allocated to higher education. 39. The delegation reported that, following the adoption of resolution 01-14 of the National Council for Migration, the Government of the Dominican Republic would proceed to establishing a new visa for seasonal workers, in order to regularize their immigration status. 40. One of the mayor challenges that the State had to overcome was socioeconomic differences and it was doing so by guaranteeing stable economic and educational development and that want was reduced and delinquency and antisocial acts limited. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 41. During the interactive dialogue, 48 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 42. Morocco commended the Dominican Republic for measures to meet the needs of the population, especially Act No. 1-12 on the National Development Strategy, and requested further information on the national plan referred to therein. It welcomed efforts to combat corruption. It noted the provision of human rights training and asked whether the implementation of a general framework for human rights education was envisaged. Morocco made recommendations. 43. The Netherlands noted that, despite efforts to establish gender equality and equity, gender-based violence was prevalent and would remain so as long as it was excluded from the Criminal Code. It expressed concerns about maternal mortality rates and discrimination against lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) persons. The Netherlands made recommendations.  44. Nicaragua noted reforms to the Criminal Code and the adoption of new legislation, including the General Migration Act. It acknowledged measures aimed at resolving the irregular situation of migrants and encouraged the country to continue working in that area, while recognizing the challenges faced in that respect. Nicaragua made recommendations. 45. Norway welcomed the creation of the position of Ombudsperson. It was concerned about the Constitutional Court ruling to revoke citizenship rights of, and in some cases expel, descendants of migrants residing in the country and the high incidence of violence against women. It recalled that the Government had accepted during its first review recommendations to end discrimination against LGBT persons. Norway made recommendations. 46. Paraguay welcomed amendments to the Criminal Code, in particular the criminalization of torture and forced disappearances, and penalties for domestic violence and feminicide. It applauded the appointment of the Ombudsperson, the introduction of a strategic framework to address child labour and efforts to ensure birth registration of all children. It noted initiatives for the prevention and prosecution of domestic violence. Paraguay made recommendations. 47. The Philippines acknowledged legislative changes to enhance the rights of children, women and persons with disabilities. The National Council for Migration would contribute to strengthening migrants’ rights and it encouraged the periodic review and enhancement of related programmes. Efforts to combat trafficking in persons should continue. The Philippines made recommendations.  48. Portugal welcomed the commitment to improve the human rights situation in the country, the appointment of the Ombudsperson, the willingness of the Government to consider requests from special procedures to visit the country, and measures taken concerning the regularization and naturalization of migrants in an irregular situation. Portugal made recommendations. 49. Singapore noted efforts to promote gender equality, illustrated through the high number of women in political office, to strengthen protection of women against domestic violence, and the establishment of a helpline and reception centre in that regard. It noted the creation of the Special Prosecutor’s Office to Combat Trafficking and Smuggling in Persons and the enforcement of anti-trafficking regulations. Singapore made recommendations.  50. Slovenia welcomed measures to combat violence against women. It noted the concerns raised by the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Human Rights Committee about racial discrimination and regretted the difficult situation of Haitian migrants and Dominican nationals of Haitian descent. It expressed concern at the Constitutional Court ruling to revoke the citizenship of Dominican nationals of Haitian descent. Slovenia made recommendations.  51. Spain commended the Dominican Republic for directly incorporating international treaty obligations into its current Constitution. Spain made recommendations.  52. Switzerland was concerned about the situation of persons of Haitian descent, who had been stripped of their nationality right following a Constitutional Court ruling. It expressed concern about violence against women. In the light of reports of human rights violations committed by the police, it commended steps to establish a committee to reform the national police. Switzerland made recommendations.  53. Thailand commended efforts to strengthen domestic legislation and institutions, particularly narrowing socioeconomic gaps and increasing access to basic services for vulnerable groups. It noted the ongoing reform of the public health sector. Efforts to enhance women’s role in economic and political spheres were commendable, but traditional stereotypes remained a challenge in that regard. Thailand made recommendations.  54. Trinidad and Tobago recognized the challenge in combating trafficking in persons and commended progress made in addressing the problem. The Constitutional Court ruling that stripped many Dominicans, mostly of Haitian descent, of citizenship violated international obligations and should be redressed without delay. It noted that, despite the recent steady economic growth, levels of poverty and inequality remained high. It made recommendations.  55. Turkey commended the adoption of the National Development Strategy. It noted developments concerning women’s rights and the focus on the elimination of violence against women. It noted the adoption of a policy to invest in young people, the planned road map to eradicate child labour and cooperation with both civil society and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). Turkey made recommendations. 56. Ukraine commended ratification of CAT and noted the appointment of an Ombudsperson. It expressed concerns about the conformity of migration legislation with international standards on nationality and encouraged the Government to abstain from applying the General Migration Act retroactively and to enable those with Dominican nationality from birth to maintain it. Ukraine made recommendations. 57. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland encouraged further security services reform to address the unacceptable number of extrajudicial killings by the national police. It was concerned by corruption within the judicial system. It expressed concern at racial discrimination, which should be eliminated, particularly regarding the issue of identity documents. It welcomed the appointment of an Ombudsperson and prison reform. It made recommendations. 58. The United States of America commended the appointment of an Ombudsperson. It urged the Government to consult with international partners and civil society to address concerns regarding the Constitutional Court ruling on citizenship. It expressed concerns about labour-related violations, shortcomings in labour inspection and the use of excessive force and unlawful killings by the national police, despite efforts towards reform. It made recommendations.  59. Uruguay commended the ratification of CAT and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD). Cases of statelessness remained a concern. It nevertheless appreciated efforts to confront the problem and encouraged the Dominican Republic to step up such efforts through coordination with the United Nations system. Uruguay made recommendations. 60. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela noted the “Progress with Solidarity” development project; investment in education and the “Quisqueya Aprende Contigo” Plan; and penitentiary reforms that sought to reintegrate prisoners into society and process complaints against prison officials. It requested further details on measures to combat domestic violence. It made recommendations. 61. Viet Nam commended the institutionalization of national human rights mechanisms, strengthening of domestic legislation and accession to international human rights instruments, including CAT. It noted measures to tackle racial discrimination and trafficking in persons, and to protect vulnerable groups. Viet Nam made recommendations. 62. Algeria welcomed ratification of CRPD and CAT. It noted the National Development Strategy, which it hoped would improve citizen’s enjoyment of their human rights. It encouraged the Government to follow up on commitments through programmes for vulnerable groups. The country would benefit from technical assistance. Algeria made recommendations. 63. Angola commended progress in human rights, especially in the areas of health and education, the latter having received 4 per cent of GDP. It asked what concrete measures had been taken to protect and integrate persons with disabilities into society and what results were envisaged. It requested information on the policy to end violence against women. Angola made a recommendation. 64. Argentina commended progress made since the first UPR cycle, including ratification of CAT and creation of the Human Rights Unit in the Attorney General’s Office. It noted efforts to protect the rights of migrants and encouraged further steps to resolve the situation of persons of Haitian descent and their children. Argentina made recommendations. 65. Australia acknowledged progress on gender-based violence and inequality. It expressed concern regarding human rights violations by law enforcement officials, and the Constitutional Court ruling of September 2013 which introduced a retroactive and restrictive interpretation of nationality provisions that largely affected persons of Haitian origin. It was concerned by the treatment of migrant workers through the deportation process. Australia made recommendations. 66. Belgium commended the Dominican Republic for reopening dialogue with Haiti on the issue of migration. However, many challenges remained in that regard, particularly concerning combating all forms of discrimination. Welcoming legislation on the prevention and eradication of violence against women and provision of affordable medical care, it remained concerned by the incidence of sexual violence. Belgium made recommendations. 67. The Plurinational State of Bolivia noted the establishment of the Constitutional Court, Human Rights Unit in the Attorney General’s Office, National Directorate for Victims Services, and Office for the Legal Representation of Rights of Victims, to improve access to justice. Efforts to strengthen human rights institutions, legislation and policies should continue. It made recommendations. 68. Brazil noted the ratification of CAT and applauded the reduction in fatalities resulting from domestic violence. It commended efforts to eradicate poverty. While the Bilateral Dominican-Haitian Commission had been reinstated, the Constitutional Court ruling that affected the nationality of persons of Haitian descent should be addressed. Suspension of deportation of Haitian migrants was a positive step. Brazil made recommendations. 69. Canada requested details on the status and impact of measures, agreed in 2010, to combat and penalize human trafficking, including the number of prosecutions. It welcomed legislative initiatives to assist persons with disabilities, enabling social inclusion and more productive life and respect for their rights. Canada made recommendations. 70. Chile commended promulgation of a new Constitution; the ratification of CAT and CRPD; and progress in combating human trafficking and sexual exploitation. It noted the prioritization of universal access to education and health care, the latter to reduce maternal and infant mortality. It acknowledged the explanation of the Constitutional Court ruling on nationality, and noted efforts to legalize foreigners. Chile made recommendations. 71. Colombia applauded the new Constitution; appointment of an Ombudsperson; the implementation of Act No. 1-12 on the National Development Strategy, the Criminal Code, the Organic Act on the National Police, the national action plan against trafficking in persons, and the law to eradicate violence against women; and progress made in the health sector. Colombia offered assistance in implementing the recommendations it had made. Colombia made recommendations. 72. Cuba commended the Dominican Republic for Act No. 1-12 on the National Development Strategy, which promoted rights related to education, childhood, adolescence, women, social development, life, persons with disabilities and the elderly. It acknowledged improvements in health-related services and infrastructures. Construction of new schoolrooms and expansion of educational programmes would improve the education system. Cuba made recommendations. 73. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea commended the progress made regarding recommendations accepted during the first UPR cycle, particularly the implementation of a strategic framework to eradicate child labour, and development of provisions to combat child abuse, including corporal punishment and to support child and adolescent victims of violence. It made a recommendation. 74. Djibouti acknowledged the creation of the supreme centre with in the public prosecutors service of the Human Rights Unit, contributing to the implementation of human rights-related decisions and directives. It noted steps taken to support vulnerable groups, and commended the National Development Strategy, which focused on enjoyment of fundamental human rights. Djibouti made a recommendation. 75. Ecuador recognized progress made in the promotion and protection of human rights, especially efforts to improve the quality of life and rights of persons with disabilities. It noted the significant investment in education, the programme for early childhood care, the System of Statistical Indicators for Children and Adolescents, and programmes to prevent teenage pregnancy. Ecuador made recommendations. 76. Egypt noted progress made since the first UPR cycle; including improving citizens’ access to human rights institutions. A resolution of the Supreme Council of the Public Prosecution Service had led to the establishment of the Human Rights Unit, which operated under the Attorney General’s Office. Egypt made recommendations. 77. Estonia positively noted the involvement of civil society in the preparation of the report. It welcomed accession to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and the ratification of CAT, which should be implemented. Commending efforts to promote women’s rights, guarantee gender equality and combat violence against women and girls, which remained a concern, it urged the full implementation of related legislation. Human rights violations by police and security forces should be investigated and prosecuted. It encouraged efforts towards universal free primary education. Estonia made recommendations. 78. France welcomed the efforts made by the Dominican Republic to implement several of the recommendations made during the first cycle of the UPR in 2009. It commended ratification of CAT. France made recommendations. 79. Germany commended the progress made since the first UPR cycle. It expressed concern regarding the discrepancy between the country’s legal standards and their implementation, with particular regard to violence against women and excessive use of force by police officers. Discrimination faced by migrants, especially families of Haitian descent, was of concern. Germany made recommendations. 80. Guatemala noted Act No. 1-12 on the National Development Strategy and the creation of the National Register for the Assessment and Certification of persons with disabilities, which would facilitate development of appropriate policies; the Human Rights Unit in the Attorney General’s Office; and the National Council for Migration. It reiterated concerns regarding legislation on nationality and migration, particularly affecting Haitians born in the country. Guatemala made a recommendation. 81. Indonesia acknowledged the consolidation of human rights principles into domestic legislation, Act No. 1-12 on the National Development Strategy, the review of Act No. 42.00 on disability, the establishment of the Human Rights Unit in the Attorney General’s Office, the appointment of the Ombudsman and the establishment of the Constitutional Court. It commended efforts to protect women’s rights and improve access to education. Indonesia made recommendations. 82. Iraq welcomed implementation of the National Development Strategy, establishment of the Human Rights Unit in the Attorney General’s Office, and improved access to human rights institutions for citizens. It noted campaigns to end violence against women, and measures to combat poverty and improve access to education for all children, despite their legal status. Iraq made a recommendation. 83. Ireland noted steps to tackle gender-based violence, including the provision of protection and access to information for victims. It remains concerned about the continuing high incidence of killings of women. The Criminal Code should adequately punish violence against women. Constitutional Court ruling TC0168/13 could result in statelessness for many, particularly persons of Haitian descent. Welcoming the prosecution of freedom of expression violations, it expressed concern regarding threats against journalists and human rights defenders who have opposed the decision of the Constitutional Court. The Government should cooperate with the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders. Ireland made recommendations. 84. Italy welcomed the ratification of CAT, encouraging its implementation, and measures to improve human rights education. Despite steps taken, gender-based violence remained a concern. It asked what steps had been taken to combat exploitation of children, such as prostitution, pornography and domestic work. It noted the policy to “clean up” national institutions, and police and security forces. It expressed concern regarding the Constitutional Court ruling on nationality. Italy made recommendations. 85. Jamaica noted the prioritization of persons with disabilities and the strengthening of National Council for Persons with Disabilities, establishment of the Human Rights Unit in the Attorney General’s Office, and implementation of a strategic framework and national road map to eliminate child labour by 2020. The discriminatory Constitutional Court ruling TC0168/13 would render many persons of Haitian descent stateless, which was of concern. It welcomed the resumption of dialogue with Haiti in seeking to address this issue. It urged the Government to resolve the issue of citizenship rights of Dominicans of Haitian descent and other affected nationals. 86. Malaysia noted legislative and institutional measures to protect and promote human rights. It commended steps to advance women’s rights, and mechanisms to combat violence against women and provide assistance to victims of abuse. It noted efforts to protect children’s rights, particularly to improve the quality of education. Malaysia made recommendations. 87. Somalia commended the progress identified in the national report. It noted that 74 of the 79 recommendations made during the first UPR cycle had been accepted, and that the implementation of many of those had begun. Somalia made recommendations. 88. Montenegro welcomed the ratification of CAT, and asked how it would be implemented, notably in cases of excessive use of force by law enforcement officials, especially in prisons. It requested details of the measures taken following the recommendations made by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women. Noting decriminalization of abortion in some cases, it asked whether legislation would be amended in cases of rape, incest or fetal malformation. Montenegro made recommendations. 89. Mexico noted Criminal Code reform in areas such as domestic violence, slavery and racial segregation. It commended the establishment of the Constitutional Court and the Human Rights Unit in the Attorney General’s Office. It applauded the ratification of CAT and other efforts to combat torture, and urged cooperation with the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Mexico made recommendations. 90. Regarding the question raised by Liechtenstein and the Netherlands on the Kampala Amendments, the delegation reported that the amendments were under internal consultation, but that in the draft Penal Code under consideration by Congress, all grave crimes under the Rome Statute, including the crime of aggression, were established as criminal offences. 91. Regarding the question raised on LGBT community, the Dominican Republic reported that it guarantees their rights, in accordance to articles 8 and 39 of the Constitution regarding the right to equality for all. The draft Penal Code also included norms against discrimination, the Dominican Republic had co-sponsored the declaration aiming to fight discrimination based on sexual orientation and there were no restrictions on public activities such as the Caravan of Gay Pride. 92. Regarding the questions raised on the ruling of the Constitutional Court by several delegations, the delegation stated that in the Dominican Republic all persons, including foreigners, had access to the rights to health, education and work. The decision of the Constitutional Court did not affect any person who had been born in the Dominican Republic and issued with a valid birth certificate. Those who had been born in the Dominican Republic and who were registered on the Civil Register but had irregular documentation, as long as that documentation had not been obtained by fraudulent means, might benefit from a special law that would allow them to acquire Dominican nationality. Those who did not wish to apply under that law could appeal to the Court. 93. In its ruling, the Court stated that nobody could be deprived of documentation by an administrative process but that the procedure must be in line with the Court procedures. In a first survey of the Civil Register, there were 53,847 children of foreigners on the register, of whom 24,392 were registered irregularly. In order to deal with the cases of those children, the Government had proposed a special bill that would recognize those persons as citizens of the Dominican Republic, as they did not have links or roots in any other country. The President will bring the draft before Congress once the next regular legislative period started. 94. As a result of Constitutional Court ruling TC0168/13, no one had lost their nationality and no person had been affected. The ruling only determined that any person that had been proved to be irregularly registered, i.e., not in in compliance with the law in force at the time of their birth, would be individually subject to a nullification process before the competent courts, which would decide on the validity of his or her documents. 95. The ruling stated that, from 1929 to date, all persons born in the Dominican Republic are nationals of the country with two exceptions: the children of accredited diplomats, in line with the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, and the children of persons in transit and of foreigners who are irregularly in the country. Therefore, the delegation concluded that the ruling could not be retroactive, as the rule only referred to laws that had been in force since 1929. 96. Regarding Germany’s question on the support provided to persons without documents to prove their migratory status, the delegation noted that the Government had established, by Presidential Decree 327-13, the national plan for the regularization of foreigners in irregular migration situations, which sought to regularize those foreigners living without a legal status. An easy and free-of-charge procedure had been established so that in the next 18 months those interested could register and present documents showing they have links with Dominican society and that they had economic roots. According to the 2012 immigrants survey, there were nearly half a million foreigners: a majority did not have a legal status and more than half did not have identity documents from their country of origin. As a guarantee for foreigners, the Government had forbidden any deportations for those who had requested to be covered by the plan during its implementation. 97. The delegation finally expressed its satisfaction for being able to present the report and assured that all the recommendations would be taken into account, trusting that, with the assistance of various countries, the Dominican Republic could ensure that human rights were established definitively as the main guide for a life with dignity. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations** 98. The following recommendations will be examined by the Dominican Republic which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-sixth session of the Human Rights Council in June 2014: 98.1. Consider ratifying those international human rights instruments to which it is not yet a State party (Nicaragua); 98.2. Ratify those international human rights instruments to which it is not yet a party, such as the Second Optional Protocol to the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child of 1989 (Spain); 98.3. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the ICESCR; the Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR; the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance; and, finally, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Portugal); 98.4. Consider accession to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Ukraine); 98.5. Ratify the OP-CAT and to take policy measures to prevent torture and ill treatment (Estonia);98.6. Consider signing and ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Mexico); 98.7. Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Paraguay); 98.8. Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Uruguay); 98.9. Analyse the possibility of ratifying the 1990 International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Ecuador); 98.10. Continue efforts to foster unity in a diverse society, including to migrants, through considering the ratification of ICRMW (Indonesia); 98.11. Continue efforts made to achieve ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the acceptance of the competence of its Committee (Argentina); 98.12. Accede to the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Iraq); 98.13. Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance as well as the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at abolition of the death penalty (France); 98.14. Consider ratification of ICCPR-OP2 (Montenegro); 98.15. Consider ratifying the conventions on stateless persons (Nicaragua); 98.16. Consider acceding to the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness (Uruguay); 98.17. Accede, as early as possible, to the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness (Brazil); 98.18. Take urgent steps to ensure full respect for the right to a nationality, and ratify the August 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, which it signed in December 1961 (Ireland); 98.19. Consider ratifying ILO Convention 189 on Decent Work for Domestic Workers (Uruguay); 98.20. Ratify the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Estonia); 98.21. Ratify the Kampala Amendments to the Rome Statute (Estonia); 98.22. Take the appropriate measures to develop the position of the Ombudsman into an independent human rights institution in line with the Paris Principles (Norway); 98.23. Ensure the full independence of the Office of the Ombudsman in accordance with the Paris Principles on independent national human rights institutions (Portugal); 98.24. Ensure the independence of the Office of the Ombudsman in accordance with the Paris Principles (Ukraine); 98.25. Ensure compliance of the Ombudsman’s institution with the Paris Principles (France); 98.26. Take measures to provide the Office of the Ombudsman with adequate resources (Ukraine); 98.27. Prioritise the adequate resourcing and staffing of the Ombudsman’s Office, ensure that State institutions, including the National Police, collaborate fully with the Office and consider a public campaign to demonstrate to Dominican citizens how this institution can help protect and guarantee their human rights (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 98.28. Develop a national human rights plan (Paraguay); 98.29. Redouble its efforts to enforce more effectively the specific existing legislation and fully implement, among others, the Strategic National Plan for the Reduction of Maternal and Child Mortality, the National Plan for the Prevention of teenagers’ pregnancy, and the Strategic Plan for the Prevention, Detection, Attention and Punishment of Violence against Women and Domestic Violence. In particular, the Dominican Republic could provide adequate resources to the relevant Ministries to ensure an effective assistance to victims (Spain); 98.30. Continue its efforts in the fight against corruption (Morocco); 98.31. Extend an open invitation to the United Nations special procedures (Portugal); 98.32. Extend a standing invitation to all thematic Special Procedures (Montenegro); 98.33. Issue a standing invitation to all special procedures of the Human Rights Council (Uruguay); 98.34. Work with the media and civil society organizations in changing attitudes and combat discrimination against women (Thailand); 98.35. Continue supporting the efforts to empower women in social and public life, including by providing adequate financial and human resources to implement policies and programmes afforded to them (Malaysia); 98.36. Take further steps to combat racial discrimination and human trafficking (Viet Nam); 98.37. Pursue its policy to protect the most vulnerable persons who are victims of racial discrimination (Angola); 98.38. Continue working on strengthening the protection and the necessary guarantee for all victims of racism or other forms of discrimination (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 98.39. Introduce awareness-raising activities with the aim of eliminating conditions and attitudes perpetuating discrimination against Haitian migrants as well as the Dominicans of Haitian descent (Slovenia); 98.40. Continue taking the appropriate measures to better integrate and fully recognize persons of African descent as an important part of the Dominican society (Somalia); 98.41. Take the necessary measures to prevent arbitrary detentions based on discriminatory criteria of any kind, particularly those related to phenotype or those directed against LGBT persons (Mexico); 98.42. Adopt legislation to protect LGBT persons against gender-based violence and discrimination (Netherlands); 98.43. Strengthen its efforts and establish and implement policies and measures to address discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity (Norway); 98.44. Establish enforced disappearances and extrajudicial executions as criminal offenses under the Penal Code (Mexico); 98.45. Establish an independent body responsible for investigating possible police abuses (Spain); 98.46. Investigate all allegations of the use of excessive force, including killings, by law enforcement agents and ensure that they receive training on the appropriate use of force so as to prevent unnecessary causalities (Canada); 98.47. All law enforcement be conducted in accordance with international human rights standards and that the Dominican Republic undertakes prompt independent investigations into all alleged violations by officials (Australia); 98.48. Ensure the respect of human rights by law enforcement bodies and strengthen efforts to guarantee the impartiality of investigations and prosecution of police officers involved in acts of violence (France); 98.49. Expedite the comprehensive reform of the police (Spain); 98.50. Integrate a human rights based approach in the presidential commission for the reform of the police, establish an independent governance mechanism to investigate violations of human rights and ensure access to justice for victims (Switzerland); 98.51. Bolster mandatory human rights training for the security forces and strengthen mechanisms to investigate alleged abuses committed by security forces (United States of America); 98.52. Increase its efforts to ensure effective investigation into the high number of homicides and into the abuse of power by police officials and to hold those responsible accountable (Germany); 98.53. Launch an open dialogue with the civil society with a view to identifying and adopting further measures aimed at preventing possible abuses committed by police and security forces, and ensure that the victims and their relatives have access to fair and independent justice (Italy); 98.54. Continue incorporating into its national legislation measures to protect the rights of women and girls, and punish violence against women (Nicaragua); 98.55. Study amending its Penal Code, by incorporating the criminalization of all forms of violence against women (Uruguay); 98.56. Ensure that the Ministry of Women, the Ministry of Health, the Office of the Prosecutor General and other institutions with a role in preventing and addressing cases of gender-based violence are adequately resourced (Norway); 98.57. Take the necessary measures in order for the Ministry of Women to have adequate resources to strengthen the policies for women victims of domestic violence (Paraguay); 98.58. Continue to enhance the protection of women against domestic violence and further promote gender equality in its society (Singapore); 98.59. Implement the Strategic Plan for the prevention, detection, and repression regarding violence against women, and ensure that relevant departments have adequate resources to implement the Plan (Switzerland); 98.60. Allocate the necessary resources to the campaigns, plans and programs which were launched with the aim of strengthening the strife of preventing violence against women (Turkey); 98.61. Implement the strategic plan for the prevention, identification, support and prosecution of acts of violence against women and domestic staff (Belgium); 98.62. Strengthen the national action plan for the protection of women and girls against gender based violence (Belgium); 98.63. Strengthen the implementation in practice, of the law on the eradication of violence against women, particularly through the implementation of strategic action plans and the establishment of units for comprehensive care to victims, with emphasis on regions and localities (Colombia); 98.64. Keep running multiple programmes to combat against the domestic violence supported by the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Women (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 98.65. Pursue efforts to promote the rights of women and adopt all necessary measures to fight against violence against them (France); 98.66. Take more effective measures to reduce violence against women, especially in the domestic sphere, to eliminate the occurrence of ‘feminicidios’ and to reduce gender inequality (Germany); 98.67. Step up its efforts in order to prevent gender-based violence, punish perpetrators and provide the victims with adequate remedies, inter alia by enhancing the resources devoted to the Ministry of Women and establishing the Units for the Integrated Assistance for Victims in all provinces (Italy); 98.68. Continue its work to prevent the forced labour of women especially in the sugar cane plantations (Trinidad and Tobago); 98.69. Finalize and implement the road map “free from child labour by 2020 and from its worst forms by 2015” in the near future (Turkey);  98.70. Continue the efforts directed towards eliminating child labour (Ecuador); 98.71. Continue to strengthen its domestic framework and institutions to combat human trafficking (Singapore); 98.72. Intensify its efforts to combat human trafficking (Trinidad and Tobago); 98.73. Intensify its efforts to combat human trafficking (Algeria); 98.74. Strengthen efforts to combat smuggling and trafficking in persons, in order to eradicate this crime (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 98.75. Consider the recommendations on reforms to the justice system made by the President of the Supreme Court in his speech of 7 January and identify improvements which will help to guarantee the human right of access to justice. This should include thorough investigation of malpractice and a zero tolerance approach towards corruption (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 98.76. Take all necessary measures to provide effective birth registration (Belgium); 98.77. Ensure effective investigation of human rights violations against journalists and human rights defenders and prosecution of the individuals responsible (Ireland); 98.78. Decriminalize defamation in line with international standards (Estonia); 98.79. Strengthen labour law enforcement by providing training to labour inspectors and conducting outreach campaigns to inform workers of their internationally recognized worker rights (United States of America); 98.80. Pursue efforts aiming towards putting an end to social inequality (Algeria); 98.81. Continue to promote the social and human development of the Dominican population by devising public policies and taking affirmative actions aimed at eliminating remaining social inequalities (Philippines); 98.82. Continue to give priority to the fulfilment of the basic rights of its citizens, particularly to food and to an adequate standard of living, by intensifying the implementation of comprehensive poverty-alleviation programs (Philippines); 98.83. Heighten the action to mitigate and eventually eliminate extreme social inequalities within the country thereby ensuring equal access by all persons to health care, education and housing (Trinidad and Tobago); 98.84. Continue strengthening its social plans in the area of the reduction of poverty and social exclusion (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 98.85. Continue consolidating the successful measures established to ensure food security and the welfare of its people (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 98.86. Provide access to adequate and affordable housing for everyone (Egypt); 98.87. Establish and implement strategies to achieve all MDGs by 2015, especially goals related to the rights of women and children (Viet Nam); 98.88. Strengthen services aimed at protecting women, children and other marginalized or vulnerable groups (Australia); 98.89. Consider adopting legislative measures to facilitate access of women in rural areas to land ownership; to ensure that poverty reduction and income generating strategies include provisions relating to rural women; and to ensure access by rural women and girls to education (Egypt); 98.90. Continue strengthening the Dominican social security system and the implementation of the Comprehensive Law for the national development strategy until 2030, which was issued on January 25, 2012 (Somalia); 98.91. Ensure universal access to health for all, by providing adequate funding in undertaking such a policy and allowing sufficient training for health personnel (Thailand); 98.92. Continue the current efforts to increase health-care expenditures and ensure universal access to health and adequate training of health personnel (Egypt); 98.93. Continue the efforts of the Government to ensure the improvement of their health system, as well as progress in other socio-economic and cultural rights (Cuba); 98.94. Adopt a plan to reduce maternal mortality and to equally decriminalize abortion in cases of incest or rape (Netherlands); 98.95. Ensure sufficient funds to effectively lower the pregnancies in adolescents, also by launching awareness-raising activities (Slovenia); 98.96. Take all necessary measures for the effective implementation of the national strategic plan to reduce maternal mortality 2012-2016 (Belgium); 98.97. Strengthen the National Strategic Plan for the Reduction of Maternal Mortality 2012-2016 and the National Plan for the Prevention of Adolescent Pregnancy (Colombia); 98.98. Guarantee full and effective recognition of sexual and reproductive rights (France); 98.99. Continue its efforts with a view to adopting HIV/AIDS care programs, including support services and effective prevention campaigns (Chile); 98.100. Continue taking measures that guarantee the right to education of its population (Cuba); 98.101. Take legislative measures to guarantee in the law universal access to primary and secondary schooling for all children without discrimination (Belgium); 98.102. Continue strengthening education policies to ensure the schooling of all children (Chile); 98.103. Encourage the authorities to strengthen educational policies in order to provide for full school enrolment of all children (Djibouti); 98.104. Continue its current efforts to provide access to quality education without discrimination for the school-age population throughout the country (Egypt); 98.105. Continue the efforts in the field of education including providing a high quality of education system that is inclusive, universal and free (Indonesia); 98.106. Continue to focus on the overall improvement in the quality of education provided, including by continuing to provide human rights education, training and courses to students, civilian populations and law enforcement officials (Malaysia); 98.107. Ensure that its migration policies adopt a human rights based approach and respect the fundamental rights of migrants (Morocco); 98.108. Ensure the protection and promotion of the rights of migrants, in particular the safeguarding of the interests of children and adolescents (Colombia); 98.109. Introduce effective measures to prevent discriminatory practices linked to the process of granting citizenship and civil status registration (Norway); 98.110. Undertake all necessary measures to immediately recognize citizenship to those who had it at the time of their birth (Slovenia); 98.111. Apply promptly and in a non-discriminatory manner the Plan for the Regularization of Foreigners and consider, for these effects, the recommendations of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights following its visit to the country on December 6, 2013, stating that the process, as a whole, be made in accordance with its international human rights obligations (Spain); 98.112. Respect every person’s right to nationality in accordance with the recommendations of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and the judgment of the Inter-American Court on Human Rights (Mexico); 98.113. Maximize its efforts to resolve the cases of statelessness, in coordination with UNHCR and with the support, among others, of the United Nations and Inter-American multilateral systems, strengthening a national civil registration system, so as to ensure that all the inhabitants of the Dominican Republic enjoy their rights (Uruguay); 98.114. Strengthen measures to guarantee the right to a nationality and include necessary safeguards to prevent statelessness of those born in the territory of the Dominican Republic (Argentina); 98.115. Ensure that international standards on nationality and statelessness continue to be fully applied in the country to all individuals without discrimination (Italy); 98.116. Seek the technical advice of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to identify, prevent and reduce statelessness, protect stateless persons and address the statelessness situation (Brazil); 98.117. Ensure that its treatment of all affected persons is in line with its international human rights obligations and that it seek the technical advice of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to identify, prevent and reduce statelessness (Germany); 98.118. Adopt measures to ensure that Dominicans of foreign descent keep their Dominican nationality, avoiding possible cases of statelessness (Chile); 98.119. The Naturalization law include all persons of foreign descent proving birth in the Dominican Republic before 2010, whether registered or not, be given state identity documents (Australia); 98.120. Ending mass arbitrary expulsion of migrant workers and to ensure that their human rights are respected in all deportation processes (Australia); 98.121. Collaborate with the Haitians authorities on migration issues (Belgium); 98.122. Effectively follow up the guidelines adopted by the Dominican Republic and Haiti Joint Commission on concrete measures to safeguard the fundamental rights of people of Haitian origin (Brazil); 98.123. Continue the dialogue with Haiti and the efforts made to date, with the support of the international community, in order to deal with the migration problems affecting the Dominican Republic (Guatemala); 98.124. Take measures to ensure that deportations are conducted in compliance with existing international obligations, and that immigration and law enforcement officials receive the necessary training to ensure the human rights of deportees are respected (Canada); 98.125. Take steps to ensure protection of the fundamental rights of all individuals born in the Dominican Republic, including the offspring of undocumented foreigners who may be at risk of becoming stateless as a consequence of Constitutional Tribunal ruling 168/13 (Canada); 98.126. Seek the technical advice of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to identify and prevent statelessness, and protect stateless persons, to address the challenges created by the ruling of the Constitutional Court (Norway); 98.127. Give a special attention to children affected by the Constitutional Court ruling ensuring the provision of their basic rights, such as education, health and protection (Portugal); 98.128. Avoid the retroactive application of the norms that could result from the execution of the Constitutional Court’s judgment 168/13 and generate situations of statelessness for citizens holding the Dominican citizenship (Spain); 98.129. Take all possible measures to improve the situation of the persons whose rights have been adversely affected by the decision of the Constitutional Court of 23 September 2013, and to ensure compliance with its obligations under international law (Switzerland); 98.130. Take the necessary political, legislative, judicial and administrative steps to redress most urgently the unacceptable humanitarian situation created by the Constitutional Court ruling (Trinidad and Tobago); 98.131. Implement a regularization process, in accordance with its international obligations, to prevent the arbitrary deprivation of nationality, avoid deportations of populations affected by the Tribunal’s ruling, and ensure a non-discriminatory process for the acquisition of nationality by individuals born in the Dominican Republic and their descendants for whom documentation is not accessible (United States of America); 98.132. All rights be restored retroactively to those affected by the Constitutional Court judgment and that they be given prompt and non.discriminatory means to acquire their Dominican Republic citizenship (Australia); 98.133. Take all necessary measures to prevent statelessness and allow all residents to fully enjoy their fundamental rights in particular persons of Haitian’s descent who have been affected by the ruling of the Constitutional Tribunal of the 23rd of September 2013 (France); 98.134. Continue the current efforts to consider the strengthening of environmental legislation and policies, and that the establishment of legal advisory and enforcement capacity on environment should be considered as priority needs and actions (Egypt). 99. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole.  ** The conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. Annex 
[English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of Dominican Republic was headed by Alejandra Liriano de la Cruz, Vice minister of Foreign Relations, and composed of the following members: • Rhadys Abreu de Polanco, Ambassador, Head of the Human Rights Section of the Ministry of Foreign Relations; • Josue Fiallo, Ambassador, Technical Advisor for the Ministry of Presidency; • Pablo Medina, Counsellor Minister, Head of Business Affairs a.i. of the Permanent Mission to the United Nations and other International Organizations; • Katherine Urbáez, Counsellor Minister, Head of the Human Rights Subject of the Permanent Mission to the United Nations and other International Organizations. 