  United Nations  A/HRC/28/12*    General Assembly  Distr.: General 22 December 2014  Original: English   * Reissued for technical reasons on 29 January 2015  ** The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Human Rights Council Twenty-eighth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review**   Islamic Republic of Iran Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–137 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–15 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  16–137 5  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  138–139 11  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  29   Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its twentieth session from 27 October to 7 November 2014. The review of the Islamic Republic of Iran was held at the 9th meeting on 31 October 2014. The delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran was headed by Mohammad Javad Ardeshir Larijani, Secretary of the High Council for Human Rights and advisor to the Chief of the Judiciary on International Affairs. At its 14th meeting, held on 4 November 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on the Islamic Republic of Iran.  2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of the Islamic Republic of Iran: Argentina, Romania and the Philippines. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of the Islamic Republic of Iran: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/IRN/1);  (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/IRN/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/IRN/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Finland, Germany, Liechtenstein, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United States of America was transmitted to the Islamic Republic of Iran through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR).  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The head of the delegation stated that the Islamic Republic of Iran highly appreciated the UPR as a cooperative mechanism that considered human rights situations in all United Nations Member States on an equal footing, avoiding selectivity. It was essential to respect different values, traditions and cultures and to refrain from imposing specific lifestyles on others. He reiterated his country’s solid commitment to the principles of multicultural universality in the domain of human rights. 6. Several ministries, relevant commissions of the Islamic Consultative Assembly and the judiciary had been actively involved in preparing the national report. Representatives of civil society had also been thoroughly consulted, and their comments had received due consideration. 7. The Islamic Republic of Iran had worked constantly, since the first cycle of the UPR, to further promote and protect human rights, inter alia, through cultural universalism. It had promulgated major policies, adopted new laws and regulations and set up new mechanisms. Human rights courses had been incorporated in public education programmes, and courses on human rights themes had been organized for judges, judiciary staff, prison aid workers, the police force, families and civil servants. 8. Since the Islamic Revolution in 1979, 35 nationwide democratic elections had been held with a view to involving nationals in governance, without any discrimination on grounds of race, colour, sex, language or religion. Opportunities had been provided for the promotion of NGOs, political parties and associations. 9. Economic, social and cultural rights had been promoted through the Global Health Scheme, the Mother and Child Care Plan, the National Health and Medication Network, the Family Doctors System and the National Immunity Programme. Almost 95 per cent of the rural population had access to free educational services.  10. Measures to protect the rights of vulnerable groups included the development of the Family Protection Law of 2013, the establishment of the Vice-Presidency Bureau for Women and Family Affairs, the Women’s Employment Fund and the Women’s Entrepreneurship and Self- Employment Grant Scheme. Women had also been provided with additional protection against violence and abuse. 11. In the area of children’s rights, the head of the delegation highlighted the establishment of the National Focal Point on the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), in 2012, the development of the Child and Adolescent National Statute, the Law on the Protection of Children Without Guardian and the Law on the Protection of the Rights of the Family, in 2014, and the signing of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict (OP-CRC-AC), in 2011. 12. The judicial system was based on the principles of presumption of innocence, prohibition of any form of torture, court transparency, impartiality of judges, legality, compensation liability for faulty judgements, separation of political and press offences from ordinary crimes, in the interests of due process, and prohibition of arbitrary arrests. The independence of the judiciary was also secured through: constant and regulated supervision of the courts and other organizations affiliated to the judiciary; further strengthening of the Legal and Judicial Deputy Offices; establishment of the Deputy Office for the Prevention of Crime, the Deputy Office for Cultural Affairs, to promote a culture of respect for the law, and the Deputy Office for Information Technology and Communication, to ensure easy and rapid access to judicial bodies and to promote e-justice; additional specialized training courses for judges; and the establishment of free telephone-operated legal aid consultancy centres. The principle of due process of law, irrespective of race, religion, gender, ethnicity and other attributes, had been reiterated in the Constitution, the Code of Criminal Procedure and other laws. 13. The Islamic Republic of Iran continued to maintain that the appointment of a Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Iran constituted a political, selective and unjust decision. Moreover, the imposition of sanctions and unilateral coercive measures impeded citizens’ full enjoyment of human rights and were incompatible with the letter and spirit of human rights instruments. 14. The Islamic Republic of Iran renounced, as a victim of terrorism, all forms of violence, and called for more concerted international efforts to combat all forms of terrorism and extremism. The country cooperated closely with United Nations mechanisms and other States in the international campaign against drugs. The war on drug-trafficking had claimed the lives of nearly 4,000 Iranian border guards and members of the security forces over the past 34 years.  15. The Islamic Republic of Iran had provided sanctuary for more than 4 million refugees from neighbouring countries.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 16. During the interactive dialogue, 104 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue can be found in section II of the present report. 17. South Africa commended the advancement of socioeconomic rights, particularly in the fields of education and health. 18. Spain noted the continued use of cruel punishments such as flagellation, amputation and stoning. 19. Thailand welcomed progress in protecting the rights of vulnerable groups, especially women and children. 20. Egypt welcomed the establishment of the office of Vice-President for Women and Family Affairs. 21. The Sudan commended progress in the areas of education and protection of women’s and children’s rights.  22. Sweden welcomed the President’s commitment to reduce media censorship and promote a less security-oriented atmosphere. 23. Switzerland deplored the increasing number of death penalty cases and emphasized the Government’s responsibility to prevent executions. 24. The Syrian Arab Republic cautioned against basing human rights reviews on confrontation, politicization and double standards. 25. Tajikistan commended the steps taken to combat terrorism and drug trafficking. 26. Sri Lanka stated that the use of unilateral sanctions to impose policy change hindered the enjoyment of human rights. 27. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia urged the Iranian authorities to release all political prisoners unconditionally. 28. Tunisia encouraged the Islamic Republic of Iran to expedite the drafting of the Charter of Citizens’ Rights. 29. Turkmenistan commended the improvement in children’s nutrition and the expansion of health services in rural areas. 30. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland expressed concern about the death penalty, discrimination against minority religious groups and prison conditions. 31. The United States of America expressed concern about harassment of religious minorities and the detention of journalists. 32. Uruguay asked whether the CRC National Focal Point was mandated to align legislation with the Convention. 33. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela stated that unilateral sanctions violated the fundamental rights of the Iranian people. 34. Viet Nam welcomed the adoption of the Fifth National Development Plan and the general health and population policies. 35. Yemen commended the enactment of a number of laws aimed at supporting human rights. 36. Zimbabwe commended the organization of human rights training courses for Government officials, the judiciary and law enforcement officers. 37. Afghanistan expressed appreciation for the hosting by the Islamic Republic of Iran of Afghan refugees. 38. Algeria commended the adoption of the new Criminal Procedure Law. 39. Angola commended the promulgation of a law to protect children and adolescents deprived of parental protection or victims of neglect. 40. Argentina shared the concern expressed in Human Rights Council resolution 25/24 regarding the human rights situation in Iran. 41. Armenia commended the cultural and religious rights enjoyed by the country’s Armenian minority.  42. Australia urged the country to implement measures promoting freedom of expression and non-discrimination. 43. Austria was concerned by increasing executions and reports of torture, ill-treatment and deaths in custody. 44. Bahrain expressed concern about reports of severe restrictions on the rights of religious and ethnic minorities. 45. Bangladesh noted that the country would likely meet most of the Millennium Development Goals. 46. Belarus noted the development of national institutions to protect the rights of the most vulnerable. 47. Belgium was concerned about the increase in executions, including of children. 48. Benin commended the new Criminal Procedure Law that would facilitate access to justice. 49. Bhutan commended measures to advance women’s rights regarding education, health, employment and poverty.  50. The Plurinational State of Bolivia encouraged the Government to continue to strengthen human rights protection. 51. Bosnia and Herzegovina hoped that the country would develop its human rights protection system. 52. Brazil noted the recent progress, particularly regarding economic and social rights. 53. Brunei Darussalam commended the country’s activities as Chair of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) Group. 54. Burkina Faso noted the creation of new mechanisms to protect human rights. 55. Burundi encouraged the country to continue its efforts to prevent human trafficking. 56. Canada expressed great concern at Iran’s failure to apply standards of due process prior to the execution of Reyhaneh Jabbari.  57. Regarding freedoms of thought, religion, assembly and association, the delegation stated that the Islamic Republic of Iran had issued permits to 230 political parties, 400 labour and professional associations, and 60 minority religious associations. The organization of peaceful rallies and meetings was permissible under article 27 of the Constitution. On average, 300 gatherings and rallies were organized each year. Religious minorities could apply for permits for the establishment of associations to serve a variety of purposes. To date, 53 associations had obtained permits. A total of 17,000 permits had been issued under administrative bylaws to NGOs working in a variety of areas.  58. President Rouhani had appointed a special assistant for ethnic and religious minority affairs. In addition, 335 members of ethnic communities had been appointed as high-ranking State, provincial and local officials and as ministers, vice-ministers, deputy ministers, governors general and local governors.  59. The Leader was chosen by the Council of Experts, while the members of the Council, the President, and members of Parliament and of city and village councils were chosen by direct popular vote. The average rate of participation in elections was 60 per cent. Votes had been cast by 72.8 per cent of eligible voters in the June 2013 presidential elections. All elections were conducted in accordance with article 25 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). 60. Considerable progress in promotion of the press had been achieved since the Government of Hassan Rouhani had assumed office. Article 4 of the Press Law stipulated that no governmental or non-governmental authority had the right to exert pressure on the press to publish material or articles or to otherwise exercise censorship and control over the press. The Law guaranteed freedom of expression provided that the rights of the general public were protected against insults, accusations and other infringements.  61. The Constitution provided for the participation of a jury in the proceedings of the press and media courts. Article 10 of the Press Law entrusted supervision of the press, news agencies and websites to a seven-member body whose composition was designed to prevent the Government from exerting pressure on the press. About 6,100 publications were currently registered and there were 400 news agencies and websites. About 30 per cent of the publications were distributed at border regions, and some of them were printed in local languages. 62. The 2013 Islamic Criminal Code incorporated many innovative ideas aimed at guaranteeing the rights of all. Female officers had been trained in investigation and interrogation. NGOs could be involved in hearings and attorneys were present at all stages of the investigations and hearings. Judges were required to take full account of the reasoning of female defence counsel. A Family Protection Law had been enacted.  63. No one in the Islamic Republic of Iran was arrested and detained on account of their views and beliefs. Where persons were arrested, they were given a fair hearing in the presence of defence counsel and the charges against them were quashed in many cases. Statistics showed that rates of conviction were quite low, compared with many other countries, and that the accused enjoyed better treatment.  64. Referring to religious minorities, the delegation stated that Iranians of all religious and social minorities enjoyed the right to profess and practise their culture and religion and to speak their language. Although religious minorities accounted for less than 0.2 per cent of the population, they were represented by five members of Parliament, who held guaranteed seats for minorities. Subsidies were allocated from the annual budget to religious minority associations to promote their beliefs and traditions. 65. In accordance with article 13 of the Constitution, members of all minorities were granted freedom to practise their creed and traditions, to receive education in their language, to publish books and newspapers and to exercise other civil liberties.  66. The Constitution provided for equal opportunities for men and women in employment and administration of the State’s governance. The Law on the Rights and Responsibilities of Women and the Law on the Protection of the Family both provided for the promotion and protection of women’s rights. Article 230 of the Fifth Economic Development Plan called for the development of a Global Plan for the Promotion of Family and Women Affairs.  67. Maternity leave for women had been increased to nine months. Forced marriage was subject to imprisonment and such marriages were legally null and void. A bill on Protecting the Security of Women against Violence had been submitted to Parliament; its aim was to reduce sporadic violence against women. Women police and specialized consultants were being trained for the same purpose. 68. There were currently nine women members of Parliament and a marked increase had been recorded in the candidacy rate for women.  69. Chad condemned the economic sanctions imposed on the country, which required assistance from the international community. 70. Chile was concerned by the lack of adequate protection and promotion for some human rights. 71. China called upon the international community to examine human rights in the country objectively.  72. Costa Rica was concerned by the use of the death penalty for minors. 73. Cuba noted the progress made by the country in areas such as health and education. 74. Cyprus encouraged the Government to ensure functionality for monitoring and reporting mechanisms regarding the violations of children’s rights. 75. The Czech Republic thanked the delegation for its informative interventions. 76. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea commended the achievements regarding economic, social and cultural rights. 77. Denmark was concerned by reported threats and discrimination towards minorities, particularly the Baha’i community. 78. Djibouti welcomed the fruitful exchanges between OHCHR and the Islamic Republic of Iran. 79. The State of Palestine noted the measures to combat poverty, yet regretted poor health insurance coverage. 80. Eritrea noted the ongoing challenges, including economic sanctions that impacted on citizens’ well-being and economic rights. 81. Estonia encouraged cooperation with special procedures mechanisms and urged the Islamic Republic of Iran to ensure domestic protection for human rights defenders. 82. Ethiopia noted the promotion and protection of minority religious groups, including their participation in decision-making. 83. Finland expressed regret that Reyhaneh Jabbari’s case had not been retried, and condemned her execution. 84. France expressed concern about the justice system, and in particular recourse to the death penalty. 85. Germany asked about preventing early and forced marriage, and progress on the Citizens’ Rights Charter. 86. Ghana took note of the appointment of the focal point for CRC and the legislation to protect children’s rights. 87. Greece requested information on the Charter of Citizens’ Rights, and expressed concern about women’s rights. 88. Guatemala noted the adoption of national human rights instruments, and expressed concern about the constitutional definition of racial discrimination. 89. Hungary noted with concern the lack of improvement for religious and ethnic minorities. 90. Iceland noted the prevalence of the death penalty, and its application to children, in particular. 91. India welcomed mechanisms and legislative reform towards protecting vulnerable persons, and cooperation with international mechanisms. 92. Indonesia appreciated the country’s commitment to human rights, and felt that further progress could be made. 93. Iraq commended the adoption of a Statute on Methods of Monitoring Police Detention Centres. 94. Ireland was concerned about the situation of religious minorities and the use of the death penalty. 95. Israel regretted corporal punishment of children, gender-based violence and promotion of harmful marriage practices. 96. Italy noted the country’s commitment to the UPR process. 97. Japan noted Iran’s commitment towards human rights, women’s participation in society and freedom of expression. 98. Kazakhstan appreciated the measures taken on women’s and children’s rights, and called for strengthened cooperation with international instruments. 99. Kuwait welcomed the measures taken on behalf of persons with disabilities. 100. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic noted efforts to protect vulnerable groups and eradicate poverty. 101. Latvia expressed concern that no special procedure had recently been invited to visit the country. 102. Lebanon commended action to protect the rights of women, children and persons with disabilities. 103. Lithuania commended the Charter of Citizens’ Rights, expressing concern regarding systematic human rights violations. 104. Luxembourg noted the alarming use of capital punishment and violations of rights of religious minorities. 105. Malaysia commended progress regarding national legislation and policies, and encouraged efforts to establish a national human rights institution (NHRI). 106. Mali welcomed efforts to implement previously accepted recommendations, and economic and social achievements. 107. Mauritania commended the drafting of a Comprehensive Plan for the Promotion of Women and Family Issues. 108. Montenegro noted legislative reform, the improved status of persons with disabilities, and the ratification of OP-CRC-SC. 109. Myanmar noted the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals ahead of 2015. 110. The Netherlands firmly opposed the death penalty and noted the lack of significant improvement. 111. New Zealand welcomed the country’s engagement with the UPR process and cooperation on shared concerns. 112. Nicaragua noted legislative reform and attainment of the Millennium Development Goals and warned against politicization of the UPR process. 113. Niger noted legislation to protect women, promote equality and provide social services and encouraged international cooperation. 114. Nigeria encouraged ongoing efforts towards improving children’s rights, access to health and administration of justice. 115. Norway expressed concern regarding capital punishment, freedom of expression and discrimination against religious minorities. 116. Oman commended the incorporation of the Millennium Development Goals in development plans and the enhancement of women’s role in society  117. Pakistan commended progress regarding criminal procedure and child protection laws, judicial bodies and social policies. 118. Paraguay welcomed the signature of OP-CRC-AC, noted the national instruments and the need to protect women’s rights. 119. Peru noted new polices and asked for information regarding the criteria for recognizing religious minorities. 120. Poland encouraged cooperation with international instruments, expressing concern about executions and discrimination against vulnerable groups. 121. Portugal welcomed progress towards an NHRI and expressed regret at gender discrimination, domestic violence and capital punishment. 122. Qatar commended the inclusion of human rights in school curricula and the organization of human rights training courses for Government officials. 123. The Republic of Korea welcomed the drafting of the Charter of Citizen’s Rights and legislative developments. 124. Romania noted updated legislation and requested information on the internal consultations for the Charter of Citizens’ Rights. 125. The Russian Federation noted the new laws to protect children and the measures to protect the family. 126. Senegal noted significant political, judicial and legislative progress and advances in children’s and women’s rights. 127. Sierra Leone commended the Five Year Development Plan and encouraged abolition of the death penalty. 128. Singapore noted adoption of OP-CRC-AC and national laws and encouraged continued international cooperation. 129. Slovakia encouraged progress on women’s rights, the freedom of the media and access to information. 130. Slovenia welcomed the appointment of women to senior positions, but expressed concern at trafficking in women. 131. Uzbekistan commended legislative and institutional measures reforming the criminal procedural system. 132. Mexico welcomed the Charter of Citizens’ Rights, legislation on nationality and progress in women’s rights. 133. The head of the Iranian delegation said that the Islamic Republic of Iran would take all recommendations seriously and would submit a written reply to States that had asked specific questions.  134. With regard to the recent execution of Reyhaneh Jabbari, the head of delegation stated that the accused had been indicted with first-degree murder entailing the death penalty, after about seven years of legal proceedings at all levels, during which she had been defended by counsel. Pursuant to the qisas system under Islamic criminal law, the closest relatives of the victim determined whether the death penalty should be executed. The judicial authorities had persistently attempted to persuade the victim’s son to forgive the perpetrator, but he had refused, largely on account of the media propaganda, which had accused his father of violent rape, while the claim by the defence has not been established by the court.  135. With regard to homosexuality, he pointed out that homosexuality had been subject to prosecution in most Western countries in the not too distant past.  136. Minorities, including Baha’is, enjoyed a full range of opportunities and privileges under citizenship contracts. It was a paradoxical situation that certain States were perfectly willing to deprive the whole nation of Iran of basic rights through unwarranted and discriminatory sanctions, but were deeply concerned about the status of Baha’i citizens.  137. The head of delegation reiterated his objection to the imposition of specific lifestyles under the banner of human rights. The UPR should be based on impartiality and respect for multiculturalism.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**  ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 138. The following recommendations will be examined by the Islamic Republic of Iran, which will provide responses in due course, but no later than the 28th session of the Human Rights Council in March 2015: 138.1 Ratify the conventions to which it is not yet a party (Niger); 138.2 Accede to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights aimed at the abolition of the death penalty (ICCPR-OP2) (Benin); ratify ICCPR-OP2 (Portugal); 138.3 Accede to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) (Czech Republic); 138.4 Ratify CEDAW and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment (CAT) (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia);  138.5 Continue efforts to strengthen the legal framework, including by realizing its commitment to ratify CEDAW and CAT (Indonesia);  138.6 Consider ratifying CEDAW, CAT, the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW), ICCPR-OP2 and the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (ICPPED) (Sierra Leone); 138.7 Consider ratifying the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Optional Protocol thereto and the Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrants and the Members of Their Families (Burkina Faso); 138.8 Consider ratification or accession to CEDAW, ICRMW, CAT and ICPPED (Peru); 138.9 Ratify CEDAW and repeal all laws that permit gender discrimination (Iceland); 138.10 Ratify the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and its Optional Protocol (Estonia); 138.11 Ratify the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Uruguay) (Ghana) (Poland); 138.12 Step up its efforts to ensure equal treatment of women and girls, particularly by ratifying the Convention to Eliminate All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Thailand);  138.13 Accede to CAT and the Optional Protocol thereto (OP-CAT) (Czech Republic); ratify CAT and OP-CAT (Uruguay); 138.14 Ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Ghana) (Guatemala) (Poland); 138.15 Ratify CAT as soon as possible (Austria); 138.16 Sign and ratify CAT (Spain); 138.17 Ratify core international human rights conventions, in particular CAT and CEDAW (Latvia); 138.18 Reconsider the general reservation on the Convention on the Rights of the Child, with the aim of lifting it, and fully accede to the three Optional Protocols to CRC (Burkina Faso); 138.19 Reconsider its reservations to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Ghana); 138.20 Consider the possibility of acceding to the International Convention on the Rights of Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Egypt); 138.21 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Uruguay) (Ghana); 138.22 Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Estonia); 138.23 Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and fully align its national legislation with all obligations under the Rome Statute (Latvia); 138.24 Ratify and align its national legislation with the Rome Statute (Slovenia); 138.25 Strengthen its national legislation in accordance with the international treaties that it has ratified (Burkina Faso); 138.26 Continue to strengthen its domestic legal framework and implement its international human rights obligations (Singapore); 138.27 Consider introducing specific provisions in the Islamic Penal Code about investigation, prosecution and punishment of perpetrators of domestic violence (Portugal); 138.28 Make all efforts to guarantee and to protect the rights and freedoms enshrined in the international instruments the country is a party to (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia); 138.29 Accelerate the exercise to finalize the Charter of Citizen’s Rights in order to enhance its human rights institutional framework (Zimbabwe); 138.30 Intensify its efforts in the area of institutional and legislative development (Angola); 138.31 Continue its efforts to strengthen the framework for the protection and promotion of human rights (Kazakhstan);  138.32 Proceed with the Bill for the establishment of the national human rights institution (South Africa);  138.33 Continue to strengthen its national human rights mechanisms, including through finalizing the process aimed at ensuring the conformity of the national human rights institution with the Paris Principles (Egypt); 138.34 Continue its efforts for the establishment of the national human rights institution (Sudan);  138.35 Speed up the procedures concerning the establishment of a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Tunisia);  138.36 Establish promptly an independent national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Chile); 138.37 Continue strengthening institutional frameworks, including by finalizing the bill on an NHRI in line with the Paris Principles and the National Strategic Action Plan on Human Rights (Indonesia);  138.38 Establish an NHRI in conformity with the Paris Principles and provide it with the resources it requires for the effective performance of its functions (Mauritania); 138.39 Establish the national human rights commission in conformity with the Paris Principles (Niger); 138.40 Promptly approve legislation establishing an NHRI in full compliance with the Paris Principles (Portugal); 138.41 Complement the efforts necessary to the establishment of the national human rights institution in line with the Paris Principles (Qatar); 138.42 Establish an independent national human rights institution in line with the Paris Principles and provide it with adequate human and financial resources (Republic of Korea);  138.43 Expedite the creation of a national human rights institution in line with the Paris Principles (Sierra Leone); 138.44 Continue implementation of established programmes for the socioeconomic development of the country, which contribute to the protection of human rights, and complete the development of the national strategic plan of action in the field of human rights (Belarus); 138.45 Continue to pursue the adoption and implementation of administrative measures aimed at the promotion and protection of the rights of the child (Pakistan); 138.46 Continue defending the rights of its people to address the imposed economic sanctions (Sudan);  138.47 Continue efforts to highlight the negative repercussions of both terrorism and unilateral coercive measures on national development plans and on the enjoyment of basic human rights by its citizens (Syrian Arab Republic);  138.48 Continue to allocate more resources in the area of sport for all youth (Sri Lanka);  138.49 Continue to expand its successful awareness programmes on human rights (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of));  138.50 Continue its policies and initiatives aimed at the promotion of dialogue, cooperation and tolerance between different cultures and religions of the national minorities of Iran (Armenia); 138.51 The dialogue and cooperation in the field of the promotion and protection of human rights (Benin); 138.52 Keep denouncing unilateral coercive measures in all possible scenarios (Cuba);  138.53 Strengthen and expand interreligious and intercultural dialogue (Lebanon); 138.54 Fully comply with its binding international human rights obligations in the light of Iran’s commitment towards improving the overall human rights situation in the country (New Zealand); 138.55 Promote increased cooperation with the international community (Senegal); 138.56 Continue international cooperation and dialogue with the aim to improve the socioeconomic circumstances of its people (Singapore);  138.57 Take appropriate measures to develop an environment conducive to the empowerment of civil society (Algeria); 138.58 Encourage and strengthen cooperation and coordination with civil society and the NGOs in the field of human rights (Angola); 138.59 Continue to strengthen the cooperation between the State and civil society organizations involved in human rights education (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of));  138.60 Work further on human rights education for public servants and law enforcement bodies (Ethiopia); 138.61 Continue to train law enforcement officials and to raise awareness on all human rights issues (Indonesia);  138.62 Pursue its policies regarding human rights education and training for law enforcement officials (Pakistan); 138.63 Further expand and promote human rights education and training programmes (Armenia); 138.64 Increase efforts to further develop human rights education (Uzbekistan); 138.65 Continue its cooperation with the United Nations and international organizations and overcome the remaining constraints and challenges (Lao People’s Democratic Republic); 138.66 Fulfil its promises of a more open society through the implementation of the recommendations it endorsed in 2010 (Norway); 138.67 Cooperate with human rights protection mechanisms (Paraguay); 138.68 Continue to cooperate with the United Nations human rights mechanisms within the framework of the implementation of ratified international instruments (Uzbekistan); 138.69 Take necessary steps to implement the commitment extended to special procedures by accepting pending visit requests (Latvia); 138.70 Give immediate and unfettered access to the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Iran (Sweden);  138.71 Invite the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Iran to visit the country and provide him with access to appropriate officials, facilities, and prisoners (United States of America);  138.72 Cooperate fully with the United Nations human rights mechanisms, including by inviting the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Iran to the country (Australia); 138.73 Fully cooperate with and allow visits by the United Nations Special Rapporteurs (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 138.74 In line with its standing invitation to special procedures, engage with and accept visits by special procedures (Brazil); 138.75 Facilitate as soon as possible the visits requested by the special procedures of the Human Rights Council (Costa Rica); 138.76 Cooperate with all United Nations special procedures mandate holders who wish to visit Iran (Germany); 138.77 Continue to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran with the aim of having greater cooperation and consultation with the Government (Guatemala);  138.78 Cooperate fully with United Nations experts and rapporteurs, including the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Iran, in line with the standing invitation issued by the Government (Hungary); 138.79 Cooperate with the Special Rapporteur and other United Nations special procedures mandate holders (Lithuania); 138.80 Issue a standing invitation to the Human Rights Council special procedures (Peru) (Poland); 138.81 Positively consider visit requests from mandate holders, in particular the request from the Special Rapporteur on the human rights situation in the country (Portugal); 138.82 Carry out constructive and cooperative engagement with the special procedures, including the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Iran (Republic of Korea);  138.83 Cooperate with the special procedures of the Human Rights Council, including the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Iran (Romania);  138.84 Extend a standing invitation to all special procedures and, particularly, allow the entry of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Iran (Slovenia); 138.85 Continue its cooperation with OHCHR and explore new avenues for human rights cooperation (India); 138.86 Continue and strengthen the cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (Iraq); 138.87 Facilitate social inclusion of women to prevent violence against women and children as well as discrimination based on sex and social status, by improving domestic mechanisms and the adoption of legislative measures for the social integration of women (Tajikistan); 138.88 Continue its national policy to promote equal opportunities and treatment with respect to employment (Sri Lanka);  138.89 Adopt a general law against discrimination (Benin); 138.90 Reform laws that contain discriminatory provisions (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 138.91 Take measures to ensure equal access of women to higher education and professional life, including by repealing the restrictions on female students and by lifting bans on women in certain professions (Germany); 138.92 Take adequate measures, such as the ratification of CEDAW, to enhance the equal role of women in society, in particular, in political, economic, social and cultural life, including sports (Greece); 138.93 Intensify efforts for the enhancement of the cultural, social and economic rights of women, children and people with disabilities (Lebanon); 138.94 Continue its national policy in promoting equal opportunity with respect to employment (Eritrea); 138.95 Intensify efforts to ensure that women and girls receive the same treatment as men and boys (Uruguay);  138.96 Amend national legislation that discriminates on the basis of gender, religion, political thought or sexual orientation (Uruguay);  138.97 Continue with the measures to improve the status of women in society (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of));  138.98 Continue its efforts to implement the comprehensive program to protect the rights and empowerment of women (Yemen);  138.99 Continue efforts to promote and protect the rights of women and children (Algeria); 138.100 Ensure equal rights and opportunities for women and girls (Austria); 138.101 Intensify efforts to create more employment opportunities for all, including the women population (Bhutan); 138.102 Take additional steps to improve gender equality and enhance women’s position in marriage, divorce, nationality, custody of children and inheritance (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 138.103 Facilitate women’s access to justice and employment (Djibouti);  138.104 Continue improving women’s empowerment programmes in the country (Ethiopia); 138.105 Ensure equal treatment of women in law and in practice, in line with the relevant recommendations of the Human Rights Committee (Latvia); 138.106 Take all steps necessary to reform the discriminatory provisions of penal and civil laws against women (New Zealand); 138.107 Continue efforts to improve and strengthen women’s status in society (Pakistan); 138.108 Continue the endeavours to enhance the rights of women, children and persons with disabilities (Qatar); 138.109. Continue to protect vulnerable groups, such as women (Senegal);  138.110 Continue to take measures to strengthen mechanisms for the protection of the rights of women and children (Uzbekistan); 138.111 Adopt provisions to prevent all forms of discrimination against women and girls and, in particular, promote access to higher education for members of the Baha’i community and other religious minorities (Chile); 138.112 Continue working so that Iranian women have the right to transmit their nationality to their children (Guatemala);  138.113 Continue to work on the creation of a national legal framework for the protection of minorities, including immigrants and refugees, thus protection from violence and appropriate treatment within society (Tajikistan); 138.114 Strengthen measures aimed at the protection of religious minorities, in accordance with articles 13 and 14 of its Constitution (South Africa);  138.115 Uphold its religious freedom obligations and release those imprisoned for their religious beliefs, such as Pastor Saeed Abedini, and protect the rights of all individuals to manifest their religious beliefs (United States of America);  138.116 Consider strengthening existing arrangements in order to promote equality of religious communities not belonging to Islam, and of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) persons through the repeal or amendment of laws that allow for prosecution or punishment (Argentina); 138.117 Take all necessary measures to protect ethnic and religious minorities from all forms of discrimination (Bahrain); 138.118 Guarantee the full enjoyment by all minorities of all their social, cultural and political rights, especially their right to education (Bahrain); 138.119 Adopt policies and mechanisms to avoid that members of any religious minority suffer from any kind of discrimination or human rights violation for exerting their right to worship according to their faith (Brazil); 138.120 Take all necessary measures to ensure the protection and non-discrimination of religious minorities, including by immediately ending production of Government-controlled media programmes spreading misinformation about religious minorities and inciting hatred against them (Denmark); 138.121 Take urgent legislative, as well as practical steps beyond those cited in the national UPR report to protect the rights of religious and ethnic minorities (Hungary); 138.122 Implement previous recommendations to guarantee the protection of the civil and political rights of all minority groups (Iceland); 138.123 Review its policies discriminating against students on account of their faith, ensure that the trials of members of religious minorities are conducted in a fair and transparent manner, and accord them the full rights of citizens of Iran (Ireland); 138.124 Enhance efforts to concretely recognize equal rights to all Iranian citizens, irrespective of their religious affiliation, including the rights to promote their religion, to change religion, to complete university studies and to be hired as civil servants or members of the armed forces (Italy); 138.125 Put an end to acts of repression against ethnic and religious minorities, in particular Baha’is, and take effective measures to put an end to discriminatory policies against them (Luxembourg); 138.126 Eliminate reported discrimination against religious minorities such as the Baha’is and offer better legal protection to such communities (Sierra Leone); 138.127 Take all appropriate measures to end discrimination and intimidation against persons belonging to ethnic and religious minorities (Slovakia); 138.128 Take measures to ensure non-discrimination in law and in practice against ethnic and religious minorities, including arbitrary detention and exclusion from higher education and government employment, as well as governmental interference in private employment against persons belonging to the Baha’i community (Sweden); 138.129 Cease all discrimination against members of religious and ethnic minorities, including Baha’is, Dervishes, Christians, Ahwazi Arabs, Balochs and Kurds, and ensure respect for freedom of religion (Australia); 138.130 End discrimination in law and in practice against all religious and ethnic minorities, such as Baha’is, Sufis, Kurds and Sunni Arabs, and ensure full protection of their rights (Austria); 138.131 Review its legislation and policy so as to ensure freedom of religion of persons belonging to religious minorities, including Baha’is, as well as protection of their other human rights without any discrimination (Czech Republic); 138.132 Put an end to discrimination and repression against people because of their ethnic and religious affiliation, including Baha’is, Kurds, Ahwazis and Christians (France); 138.133 End discrimination in law and in practice against religious and ethnic minorities, including the Baha’i community (Lithuania); 138.134 Take steps to prevent discrimination and incitement to hatred against the Baha’i or any other ethnic or religious minority, regardless of whether it is officially recognized (Mexico); 138.135 Outlaw forced or coerced sterilisation, sex reassignment surgeries and reparative therapies imposed without, free and informed consent (Iceland); 138.136 End discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation (Canada); 138.137 Engage in order to address any form of discrimination against LGBTI people and in particular to prevent any practice which can harm their dignity, such as unnecessary sex reassignment surgery, especially when carried out without duly informed consent (Italy); 138.138 Repeal the provisions in its Penal Code which criminalize consensual same-sex activities between adults (Spain); 138.139 Repeal laws criminalizing consensual sexual conduct between same-sex adults (Iceland); 138.140 Revise legislative provisions that legalize abuse, persecution, sexual violence and arrest of LGBTI persons (Iceland); 138.141 Abolish all legislation resulting in discrimination, prosecution and punishment of people based on their sexual orientation or gender identity (Israel); 138.142 Repeal all legislative provisions which lead to discriminations based on sexual orientation and declared or perceived gender identity of persons (Luxembourg); 138.143 Pay attention to cases of violence and discrimination based upon sexual orientation, in particular against LGBT persons, both in law and in practice (Chile); 138.144 Amend the Penal Code to exclude drug-trafficking related crimes from those punished by the death penalty (Spain);  138.145 Consider the cases of all prisoners condemned to death with a view to commuting their sentences and respect their right to challenge the legality of their detention before a tribunal, in compliance with international law (Switzerland);  138.146 Revise the Islamic Penal Code to ensure consistency with its international obligations, including article 6 of ICCPR, so that the death penalty is reserved for most serious crimes, never imposed for crimes committed by persons below 18 years of age and never imposed arbitrarily (Canada); 138.147 Abolish the death penalty (Luxembourg);  138.148 Consider abolishing the death penalty and ratifying the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, at its earliest convenience (Cyprus); 138.149 Amend all laws and practices to ensure that no person under the age of 18 at the time of the crime can be sentenced to death (Belgium); 138.150 Establish a formal moratorium on the death penalty and in particular cease all planned executions of juvenile offenders and prohibit the imposition of the death penalty for crimes committed by minors (Australia); 138.151 Immediately declare an official moratorium on executions, particularly for minors at the time of the crime (Belgium); 138.152 Abolish the death penalty, at least for juvenile perpetrators (Czech Republic); 138.153 Put a complete moratorium on the use of the death penalty and, short of such a decision, prohibit the death penalty for juvenile offenders and abandon the practice of public executions (Hungary); 138.154 Outlaw the death penalty for persons convicted of crimes committed before the age of 18, without exception, and implement a moratorium on all executions (Iceland); 138.155 Establish a moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing the death penalty, and guarantee that no individual under the age of 18 at the time of their alleged crime is sentenced to death, in line with its obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Ireland); 138.156 Ban executions of juvenile offenders, while at the same time providing for alternative punishments in line with the new Iranian Penal Code (Italy); 138.157 Establish a moratorium on the use of the death penalty with a view to its abolition and commute all death sentences for persons under the age of 18 (Lithuania); 138.158 As a first step, end the executions of minors, in accordance with the commitment made by Iran under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights as well as the Convention on the Rights to the Child (Luxembourg); 138.159 Take immediate measures to abolish the death penalty for crimes committed by persons when they were under the age of 18, and place a moratorium on public executions (Norway); 138.160 Abolish the death penalty for those under 18 (Paraguay);  138.161 Prohibit the application of the death penalty to minors at the time of the offence (Spain);  138.162 Issue an immediate moratorium on the use of the death penalty for juveniles and for crimes that do not meet the most serious crimes standards under international law (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);  138.163 Urgently establish a moratorium on the use of the death penalty (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia);  138.164 Take all the necessary measures to establish a moratorium on the death penalty as a first step towards its total abolition (Uruguay); 138.165 Consider establishing a formal moratorium on executions of persons condemned to death and examine the possibility of abolishing the death penalty (Argentina); 138.166 Establish an official moratorium on executions, in particular executions of juvenile offenders who were under the age of 18 at the time of the alleged crime, with a view to reviewing all cases of juvenile prisoners on death row (Austria); 138.167 Pronounce a moratorium on the use of the death penalty with a view to its prompt abolition (Costa Rica); 138.168 Extend a moratorium on the death penalty and abolish the death penalty; and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Estonia); 138.169 Cease executions and establish a moratorium with a view to abolishing the death penalty (France); 138.170 Announce a moratorium on the death penalty with a view to its eventual abolition. Pending this, take urgent steps to reduce its application, in line with international minimum standards (Germany); 138.171 Consider introducing a moratorium on the death penalty, with a view to its abolition, in particular for drug-related offences and other crimes that cannot be labelled as “most serious” ones according to international standards (Italy); 138.172 Consider a moratorium on the death penalty with a view to abolishing it (Latvia); 138.173 Establish an immediate moratorium on the use of the death penalty with a view to abolishing it (Montenegro); 138.174 Introduce a moratorium on the death penalty with a view to abolishing it (Poland); 138.175 Commute the sentences of persons sentenced to death and establish a moratorium on executions as a first step towards abolition of the death penalty (Portugal); 138.176 Immediately end all public executions (Germany); 138.177 Eliminate stoning as a form of punishment (Paraguay);  138.178 Abolish stoning as a form of capital punishment and consider abolishing “apostasy” as a capital offence (Slovakia); 138.179 Abolish the continued use of death penalty, stoning and retribution for murder (Slovenia); 138.180 Stop all executions (Israel); 138.181 Continue its efforts in combating drug trafficking and fighting this scourge (Lebanon); 138.182 Address the serious problem with land mines (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 138.183 Ensure, in accordance with articles 5 and 7 of ICCPR, freedom from torture, while in detention, for all, regardless also of sexual orientation (Denmark); 138.184 Release all persons detained solely for peaceful political activities; inquire into all cases of alleged torture in detention facilities and bring those responsible to justice (Lithuania); 138.185 Ensure decent conditions of detention (France); 138.186 Continue the work which has been started on the improvement of the conditions of detention in the penitentiary system and the integration of former prisoners into society (Russian Federation); 138.187 Prevent and punish violence against women and children (Peru); 138.188 Abolish and amend all laws that encourage and forced, early and temporary marriages of girls as young as 9, and that allow marriage between adoptive parents and their children (Israel); 138.189 Amend the Civil Code in order to bring to 18 years old the legal marriage age for both boys and girls, and repeal the amendment to the Law on the Protection of Children and Adolescents with No Guardian, which allows for marriage between adoptive parents and their adopted child (Italy); 138.190 Put forward its best efforts to eliminate all forms of discrimination against women, including early forced marriage of girls and unequal rights to marriage, divorce, inheritance and child custody (Republic of Korea);  138.191 Pass legislation to raise the legal age of marriage to 18 and to eliminate the practice of forced and temporary marriages (Sierra Leone); 138.192 Abolish the discriminatory practice of forced and early marriage, high drop-out rates in schools and restrictions to university education for girls, and promote active participation of women in the society (Slovenia); 138.193 Adopt comprehensive measures on the protection of women against any form of public or domestic violence and the implementation of a national policy to protect women at risk and to bring perpetrators to justice, as well as adopt measures for the protection of human rights defenders and journalists (Brazil); 138.194 Continue adequate measures for addressing the special needs of women and protecting children from violence (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 138.195 Adopt legislation criminalizing domestic violence, including sexual violence, together with effective implementation measures (Finland); 138.196 Guarantee the rights of women in law and in practice, including in the labour market, and combat violence against women and impunity for perpetrators (France); 138.197 Exercise due diligence to prevent, deter, investigate and punish those accountable for violence against women and girls (Israel); 138.198 Strengthen the means and measures to combat violence against women (Mali); 138.199 Ensure the effective implementation of the national programme for combatting violence against women (Russian Federation); 138.200 Revise the Islamic Penal Code provisions that are discriminatory against women and girls; take urgent legislative steps to specifically criminalize domestic violence, including marital rape (Lithuania); 138.201 Amend the Islamic Penal Code and outlaw inhuman corporal punishments (Czech Republic); 138.202 Explicitly prohibit all forms of corporal punishment of children (Israel); 138.203 Revoke all laws that allow corporal punishment of children (Israel); 138.204 Increase the legal measures aimed at guaranteeing due process and the impartiality in the administration of justice, including the independence of judges and the Bar Association, paying special attention to the recommendations concerning the death penalty formulated by the Human Rights Committee, especially in relation to juvenile offenders (Chile); 138.205 Ensure the independence of the judicial system and ensure the rules of fair trial and the rights of the defence (France); 138.206 Continue to improve the national legislation and practice in the field of the independence of the judiciary (Russian Federation); 138.207 Allow all prisoners access to legal counsel during all phases of pretrial detention and the investigative stages of cases, and allow for legal counsel to advise the accused during these proceedings (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);  138.208 Ensure immediate access to a freely chosen counsel within the first hour of the procedure, including during the first interrogations and until the end of the judicial process, as well as access to all the official documents of the procedure (Belgium); 138.209 Provide by law unobstructed access to legal counsel throughout all phases of criminal investigation, trial and appeal; ensure the accused is informed of this right immediately upon arrest; and give defendants and their lawyers unrestricted access to the full case file and all evidence against the accused (Denmark); 138.210 Guarantee due process of law in all judicial proceedings (Germany); 138.211 Ensure, in law and in practice, that all citizens are given fair trials based on the rule of law, as accepted in the 2010 UPR examination (Norway); 138.212 Ensure all the procedural guarantees and the right to a fair trial for all persons indicted of committing a crime, including the right to defence and access to a lawyer (Romania);  138.213 Take measures to ensure due process and fair trial, particularly in any process that would lead to the application of the death penalty (Mexico); 138.214 Take the necessary measures to enhance international legal cooperation in cases of serious violations of human rights and ensure the right to truth and justice (Argentina); 138.215 Investigate and prosecute all those responsible for the mistreatment or abuse of detained persons in Iran, including during the attacks on prisoners in Evin Prison in April 2014 and in the wake of the 2009 presidential election (Canada); 138.216 Ensure that those who commit torture are held accountable and ratify CAT and its Optional Protocol (Hungary); 138.217 Continue to realize concrete measures for the protection of the rights of the child and continue Government support for the institution of the family (Russian Federation); 138.218 Raise the minimum age of marriage to 18 years and ensure marriage with the legal requirement of free consent of spouses through amendments to the Civil Code and the Family Protection Law (Poland); 138.219 Take measures to fully respect the freedom of religion and belief of its citizens (Norway); 138.220 Ensure respect, in law and in practice, of the freedom of religion and belief (Poland); 138.221 Ensure the freedom of religion and belief for all citizens of Iran (Romania); 138.222 Cease its censorship of the media, as well as the harassment and arbitrary detention of journalists, and provide guarantees for the right to freedom of expression and freedom of the media (Sweden);  138.223 Release immediately and unconditionally all persons detained for peacefully exercising the rights to freedom of expression, association and peaceful assembly (Switzerland); 138.224 Work towards guaranteeing a favourable environment for the activities of journalists, human rights defenders and civil society (Tunisia); 138.225 End the harassment and persecution of journalists and release the detained Washington Post reporter, Jason Rezaian, to demonstrate its commitment to freedom of expression (United States of America); 138.226 Guarantee the right to legitimate freedom of expression, association and assembly, and release political prisoners, including activists, lawyers and journalists, detained solely for exercising these rights (Australia); 138.227 Repeal all legal provisions that infringe the freedoms of expression, assembly and association, as guaranteed by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Belgium); 138.228 Amend its press law to define the exceptions to article 24 of its Constitution in specific terms and that do not infringe upon freedom of expression (Canada); 138.229 Enhance freedom of the media, establish effective protection mechanisms for journalists against attacks and intimidation and grant its people free access to electronic media (Czech Republic); 138.230 Ensure genuine freedom of expression and information, including on the Internet, by putting an end to the harassment against journalists, bloggers and human rights defenders (France); 138.231 Ensure full respect for freedom of expression and opinion, including the freedom of the media, and guarantee unfettered access for all persons in Iran to domestic and foreign media information, both offline and online (Germany); 138.232 Take adequate steps to lift restrictions on freedom of expression and adopt a framework for the protection of journalists from persecution, intimidation and harassment (Greece); 138.233 Provide more information about the detention of journalists and individuals expressing dissenting views so as to address the concerns expressed by the Secretary-General and the Special Rapporteur (Japan); 138.234 Guarantee freedom of speech and eliminate restrictions to the free flow of information, including through the Internet, and stop arrests, prosecution and sanction of individuals for expressing views and opinions (Netherlands); 138.235 Take the necessary steps to ensure that its citizens fully enjoy the rights and freedoms awarded to them by the Iranian Constitution, with special emphasis on the right to freedom of expression, the right to political activity and the right to assemble (Norway); 138.236 Strengthen and promote freedom of expression, particularly that of the press (Senegal);  138.237 Effectively implement its international obligations to ensure the protection of human rights defenders and others exercising their rights to freedom of opinion and expression, peaceful assembly and association in compliance with international human rights law (Finland); 138.238 End its severe restrictions and surveillance of the Internet, hence guaranteeing free, unrestricted access for all its citizens to Internet and Social Media (Sweden);  138.239 Give further account to its measures to ensure public access to the Internet as well as progress being made thereon (Japan); 138.240 Strengthen measures to promote women’s economic and political participation in the country (South Africa);  138.241 Strengthen the efforts to allow a greater role for women in social and economic developments (Egypt); 138.242 Continue efforts in order to increase participation of women in political, public and professional spheres (Sri Lanka);  138.243 Enhance its efforts to strengthen women’s participation in politics and public service (Turkmenistan); 138.244 Strengthen the mechanisms aimed at the advancement of women’s rights as well as of their participation in decision-making processes (Angola); 138.245 Take legislative and administrative measures to remove legal restrictions and social barriers to women’s equal participation in the work force and access to education and government decision-making positions (Canada); 138.246 Continue its efforts in order to increase participation of women in public spheres (Eritrea); 138.247 Continue efforts for greater representation of women in the political process and their participation in public life (Malaysia); 138.248 Continue to support and empower women in public life (Oman);  138.249 Continue social and economic reforms in order to create new jobs (Djibouti); 138.250 Step up its employment stimulation measures and enhance access of the poor to basic services, including sanitation, health and education (State of Palestine);  138.251 Develop training programs for youth so as to improve their access to the labour market (India); 138.252 Continue to implement programmes in the area of education, health and social empowerment and integration of vulnerable groups, especially women, children and the disabled, through the established national mechanisms as well as with the relevant NGOs and international organizations (Brunei Darussalam); 138.253 Continue efforts to improve the social security system for better safeguarding the elderly and persons with disabilities (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 138.254 Continue its efforts to eradicate poverty (Bangladesh); 138.255 Continue implementing its national plans and programmes to reach poverty eradication goals (Myanmar); 138.256 Continue its efforts to eradicate poverty through the implementation of the tools developed in the framework of the national strategic policy (Nicaragua); 138.257 Pay special attention to the social and economic integration of the population in rural regions of the country through the development of the infrastructure and change of the regulatory framework in all spheres of life and sustenance (Tajikistan); 138.258 Continue measures for the promotion and protection of the rights of peasants and other persons working in rural areas (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 138.259 Continue to raise the level of its public services and further improve the quality and coverage of public services in rural areas (China); 138.260 Continue the programmes for economic and social development by correcting disparities between urban and rural areas (Mali); 138.261 Continue implementing the programmes which provide education, health and social services in rural areas (Myanmar); 138.262 Improve measures to provide more access by all citizens to housing (Iraq); 138.263 Continue actions to improve compliance with the human right to water, under the framework of General Assembly resolution 64/292 (Bolivia (Plurinational State of));  138.264 Continue carrying out efforts in enhancing the health services coverage in the country, according to its national development plans (Brunei Darussalam); 138.265 Intensify efforts to ensure universal access to health insurance, including access to maternal and child health care (State of Palestine);  138.266 Continue to expand its health insurance coverage to all citizens, including those in rural areas (India);  138.267 Strengthen its cooperation with civil society organizations for the promotion and protection of human rights in the area of health services (Kazakhstan); 138.268 Pursue development and health policies that respond to the needs of the Iranian people (Lebanon); 138.269 Continue its efforts aimed at improving access to health services (Pakistan); 138.270 Step up efforts to provide greater access to education and health (Turkmenistan); 138.271 Intensify and carry forward its efforts, particularly in the area of right to education (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 138.272 Redouble its efforts to strengthen public education, awareness, capacity-building programs and training (Djibouti);  138.273 Continue its efforts to bridge the gaps in the field of education, in remote areas (Malaysia); 138.274 Strengthen policies to prevent school dropout (Bangladesh); 138.275 Continue the national efforts in the area of social inclusion of persons with disabilities (Egypt); 138.276 Continue its efforts in favour of persons with disabilities, by meeting their specific needs, particularly in education and health (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 138.277 Continue to undertake measures to support and protect the rights of persons with disabilities (Kazakhstan); 138.278 Continue awareness-raising campaigns about the rights of people with disabilities (Kuwait); 138.279 Promote the rights of persons with disabilities to ensure their social integration (Uzbekistan); 138.280 Continue the adoption of special measures aimed at improving the quality of life of children with disabilities (Kuwait);  138.281 Continue maintaining good cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in favour of refugees with disabilities (Kuwait); 138.282 Ensure that religious, ethnic and sexual minorities are able to exercise their rights and freedoms, as guaranteed by the Iranian Constitution (Netherlands); 138.283 Recognize all existing religious minorities in the territory of the Islamic Republic of Iran and respect the human rights of their members (Peru);  138.284 Continue to address measures that protect religious and ethnic minorities in the interests of ensuring their full and equal participation in public and private life (New Zealand); 138.285 That measures taken to protect refugee rights be in compliance with the internationally recognized norms and standards (Afghanistan); 138.286 Strengthen the capacity of processing, hosting and integrating asylum seekers, in close collaboration with relevant stakeholders (Mexico); 138.287 Continue its efforts to provide development and humanitarian aid to least developed countries (Sri Lanka);  138.288 Continue to provide greater technical assistance to developing countries (Cuba); 138.289 Step up efforts to allocate more resources in the Constitution (Eritrea); 138.290 Consolidate the progress made towards reaching the Millennium Development Goals and in the improvement of human development indicators (India); 138.291 Continue its humanitarian aid to least developed countries (Eritrea). 139. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex   Composition of the delegation The delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran was headed by H.E. Dr. Mohammad Javad Ardeshir Larijani, Secretary General of the High Council for Human Rights and advisor to the Chief of the Judiciary on International Affairs, and composed of the following: • H.E. Mr. Mohsen Naziri Asl, Ambassador, Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Geneva; • H.E. Mr. (Hojatolislam) Hadi Sadeghi, Deputy of the Judiciary on Cultural Affairs; • H.E. Dr. Khosrow Hakimi, Deputy Secretary of the High Council for Human Rights and advisor to the Chief of the Judiciary; • H.E. Mr. Hossein Ali Amiri, Acting Minister, Ministry of Interior; • H.E. Dr. Mohammad Taghi Hosseini, Acting Minister for International Affairs, Ministry of Cooperatives, Labour and Social Welfare; • Mr. Hossein Entezami, Deputy on Press Affairs, Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance; • H.E. Mr. Kazem Gharib Abadi, Deputy Secretary General of the High Council for Human Rights on International Affairs; • H.E. Mr.Seyed Ali Raeisolsadati, Deputy on Coordination, Ministry of Justice; • Mr. Jamal Ansari, Chief of Justice of Qazvin; • Mr. Hassan Rahimi, Director General for Public Relations and Protocol of the Judiciary; • Mr. Seyed Mohammad Mir-Zamani Dekhordi, Advisor, Secretary of the High Council for Human Rights; • Mr. Ahmad Bina, Advisor, Secretary of the High Council for Human Rights; • Mr. Mohsen Ghanei, Third Counsellor, Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Geneva; • Mr. Mohammad Zareain, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Geneva; • Ms. Zahra Ershadi, Second Secretary, Permanent Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Geneva; • Ms. Behrokh Roihani Ardeshiri; • Mr. Hassan Dayai-Fard, Chief of Staff to the Head of the High Council for Human Rights; • Mr. Meysam Eslampanah, Expert, High Council for Human Rights; • Mr. Hamed Esmaeilpour, Expert, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Iran; • Mohsen Mehrzad, Expert, High Council for Human Rights; • Mr. Amir Hossein Shahmir, Interpreter; • Mr. Faramarz Hejazi, Interpreter; • Mr. Mohammad Javad Norouzpoor, Website Administrator; • Mr. Hamdi Pirmoradi, Assistant; • Mr. Ali Riyahi, Assistant; • Mr. Mojtabe Nouraya, Assistant.     