  United Nations  A/HRC/28/4    General Assembly   Distr.: General 10 December 2014  Original: English  Human Rights Council Twenty-eighth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   Italy Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–144 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–31 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  32–144 6  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  145–146 14  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  26   Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its twentieth session from 27 October to 7 November 2014. The review of Italy was held at the 1st meeting on 27 October 2014. The delegation of Italy was headed by Lapo Pistelli, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation. At its 10th meeting, held on 31 October 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on Italy. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Italy: Ethiopia, Ireland and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Italy: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/ITA/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/ITA/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/ITA/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Germany, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Spain, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America was transmitted to Italy through the troika. The questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR).  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. Lapo Pistelli, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, introduced the national report of Italy. The delegation highlighted that the action Italy had taken within the United Nations system and in other international and regional organizations had been characterized in recent years by a number of initiatives on specific issues. They had included promoting a moratorium on the death penalty, safeguarding and protecting migrants, asylum seekers and refugees, and promoting dialogue among cultures and religions.  6. The delegation then addressed the advance questions.  7. On the issue of the participation of civil society in the preparation of the national report, the Inter-ministerial Committee for Human Rights had held several consultative meetings with civil society organizations and members of the Italian parliament to discuss the contents of the national report. In particular, the implementation of recommendation No. 92 from the first UPR cycle had been ensured by publishing the draft national report on the Committee’s website in order to give civil society at large the opportunity to comment on the contents. Italy had implemented 74 out of the 78 recommendations it had accepted in the first cycle, and had implemented several recommendations that had been not accepted. In particular, the Italian Senate had recently approved a bill introducing the crime of torture, which was before the Chamber of Deputies, and in 2010, the Constitutional Court had removed illegal immigration status from the list of aggravating circumstances.  8. As for enacting domestic legislation, following the ratification of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, the parliament had been working on legislative measures to bring domestic legislation into line with international humanitarian law and the Rome Statute.  9. There had been continuing engagement in a domestic process aimed at establishing an independent national commission for the promotion and protection of human rights, in accordance with the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles). The parliament was debating the best way to establish the commission and the best tool for implementation. Since June 2014, the Inter-ministerial Committee for Human Rights had been promoting consultation with non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and representatives of civil society, and at the time of the meeting of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review in October, was finalizing a paper containing suggestions about which model of institution would best reflect the Paris Principles in Italy. 10. In 2013, Italy had presented “The Foundations of the Italian Action Plan on the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights” to the European Commission, and work was under way to finalize the Italian Action Plan by the end of 2015. 11. Owing to its geographic situation, Italy had been exposed over the previous two years to massive inflows of migrants and the country was at the forefront of an extraordinary effort to save human lives at sea. The principle of non-refoulement had always been respected, in compliance with international norms. Italy was strongly committed to search and rescue (SAR) activities at sea, ensuring migrants were brought to Italian territory. After the Lampedusa tragedy in 2013, it had intensified those activities by launching the Mare Nostrum operation in October 2013 in order to deal with the humanitarian emergency resulting from the exceptional arrival of migrants on the Central Mediterranean route.  12. As for the registration of migrants, according to the Dublin and EURODAC regulations of the European Union, forensic police and immigration officers were tasked with identification procedures. In September 2014, the Ministry of the Interior had issued guidelines to improve the efficiency of the migrant registration system. 13. After an initial period in reception centres for asylum seekers, which could last from 20 to 35 days depending on the inflow, refugees and asylum seekers were accommodated under the asylum seekers and refugees protection system network, which was managed by local authorities and financed through the National Fund for Asylum Policies and Services. 14. The System for the Protection of Asylum Seekers and Refugees (SPRAR) was tasked with managing the allocation of applicants on the basis of burden-sharing among regions, provinces and municipalities. Details were provided on measures taken for the optimization of the reception system.  15. As for the allocation and use of the new European Asylum, Migration and Integration Fund for 2014–2020, the national programme had been financed with €500 million, €310 million of which were funded by the European Union. Additional funding had been provided in 2013 and 2014 to tackle the unprecedented migrant flows. 16. Since 2006, residence permits in Italy had been issued in the form of smart cards. That system facilitated monitoring and processing applications for the first release and the renewal of the residence permit. The delegation provided details regarding the system. 17. It was noted that, from 1 January to 23 October 2014, some 151,126 migrants had arrived by sea, including 12,164 unaccompanied minors. Unaccompanied minors were entitled to a residence permit until they reached the age of 18. Upon coming of age, they could obtain a residence permit either for study or work reasons. Unaccompanied minors benefited from the protection of numerous rights, including education, health care, accommodation in a safe place, and guardianship. In addition, Italian law prohibited the deportation of minors as a general rule. 18. The stigmatization of certain ethnic or social groups remained a matter of serious concern for the central Government and local authorities and the country was strongly committed to eradicating racist and xenophobic attitudes within society. 19. The Italian legal framework contained a wide range of criminal, civil and administrative law provisions to combat racism. Information on those provisions was provided. 20. Responding to the advance questions regarding anti-Semitism and Islamophobia, the delegation noted that the Government was strongly committed to countering all forms of religious discrimination and social prejudices. Fresh impetus had been given to interreligious dialogue since 2012, when the Government had convened a Committee for Interreligious Dialogue. 21. The Italian Government was also committed to gender equality and to preventing and eliminating discrimination based directly or indirectly on sex, racial or ethnic origin, religion or belief, age or gender identity.  22. Regarding the practice of having workers sign an undated letter of resignation at the time of hiring for future use by the employer (so-called “blank resignations”), in compliance with Act No. 92/2012, the resignations became effective only after a procedure involving multiple stages with local job centres, trade unions and the Ministry of Labour, among others. Fines in cases of violation had been increased, in addition to criminal proceedings. 23. Concerning the promotion of the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) persons, the LGBT National Strategy 2013–2015 had been adopted. The four main areas of intervention were education and training; employment; security and prisons; media and communication. Each area included goals to promote equality and combat discrimination against LGBT persons.  24. Roma, Sinti and Caminanti communities had been living in Italy for a long time. With regard to their integration, the National Strategy for the Inclusion of Roma, Sinti and Caminanti Communities 2012–2020 had been adopted, in accordance with communication No. 173/2011 of the European Commission. 25. No constitutional reforms would affect Slovenian-speaking communities living in Friuli Venezia Giulia. As pointed out in the national report, several measures had been implemented since the enactment of Act No. 38/2001 including the use of minority languages in joint bodies and in public administration. 26. A bill was under discussion in the Italian parliament to amend the Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure and to revise the legal definition of defamation, including defamation through the press and any other means of publicity, insult and libel, and related sanctions, excluding any reference to detention. 27. The 17,309 proceedings pending at the European Court of Human Rights mainly concerned the length of trials and the delays in the payment of compensation. Italy had agreed with the European Court on a two-year action plan for the final settlement of about 7,000 complaints regarding compensation. A similar solution was expected for the remaining 3,000 applications regarding excessively long proceedings, which had not been included in the action plan as they had been filed after the plan had been established. 28. Approximately 3,500 more complaints concerning prison conditions had been filed by prison inmates. Following the pilot decisions in the cases of Stella v. Italy and Rexhepi v. Italy in 2014, it could be expected that the European Court would invite prison inmates to apply to the domestic courts as the decisions clearly stated that the new domestic remedies available to detainees were fully in line with the European Convention on Human Rights. 29. The national action plan against trafficking in human beings, provided for under Legislative Decree No. 24/14, would be adopted by the Council of Ministers by the end of 2014, together with the single programme for the assistance and social integration of victims of trafficking. 30. In order to reduce prison overcrowding, Italy had adopted several measures, and had in particular extended recourse to house arrest as an alternative to imprisonment. Following the ratification in 2012 of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (OP-CAT), recent legislation had provided for the establishment by the Ministry of Justice of a national authority for the rights of detainees. 31. In Italy, national interventions in the area of social assistance were mainly addressed to people who were not in the labour market, in particular elderly people and persons with disabilities. In 2008, a “social card” had been introduced to provide additional assistance to some sectors of society.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 32. During the interactive dialogue, 92 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue can be found in section II of the present report. 33. Chad welcomed the efforts Italy had made to implement the recommendations received in the first cycle and noted in particular the ratification of international instruments and the efforts made to integrate foreigners and rescue migrants at sea. 34. Chile expressed appreciation for the efforts made to implement human rights policies. Chile also noted the lack of some important institutional and legal instruments and the persistence of certain discriminatory attitudes. 35. China commended Italy for helping migrants, particularly the search and rescue operations to save innocent lives at sea. It also commended Italy for fighting against racism and protecting the Roma and other ethnic minorities, and for cooperating on human trafficking and asylum issues. 36. Costa Rica commended Italy for the adoption of the National Action Plan against Racism, Xenophobia and Intolerance and for ratifying instruments related to the protection of women against domestic violence and the protection of children against exploitation and sexual abuse.  37. Côte d’Ivoire noted the reforms Italy had implemented on gender equality, access of vulnerable persons to public services and measures in favour of migrants and asylum seekers. 38. Cuba noted resources allocated to combating discrimination, and encouraged further efforts in that regard, as well as to improve the reception, detention and integration of migrants. 39. Cyprus welcomed efforts to promote women’s and children’s rights, eliminate discrimination and save lives at sea, and welcomed the collaboration of Italy in dealing with the complex issue of migration in the Mediterranean basin. 40. The Democratic Republic of the Congo noted the ratification of OP-CAT and efforts to promote the rights of women, children, minorities and migrants. 41. Denmark welcomed the commitment of Italy to establishing a national human rights institution. It expressed concern about migrants’ rights and, in particular, the return of child migrants. 42. Djibouti welcomed the national report and humanitarian actions taken by Italy in dealing with migration issues. 43. The Dominican Republic welcomed the ratification of the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence and the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse. 44. Egypt expressed confidence that the increasing efforts of Italy in sea rescue operations and its migration management agreements with neighbouring countries, including Egypt, would effectively address existing challenges. 45. Eritrea noted with appreciation the commitment of Italy to discharging its national and international obligations, its efforts to promote and protect human rights and its strong support for the universal periodic review process. 46. Estonia noted the ratification of OP-CAT, the establishment of an acting children’s ombudsman, and rescue efforts to address the exceptional arrival of irregular migrants. 47. Ethiopia welcomed ongoing efforts to combat trafficking and discrimination,  support female entrepreneurs and persons with disabilities, and promote minority languages. 48. Finland commended the adoption of the National Strategy for the Inclusion of Roma, Sinti and Travellers Communities in Italy 2012–2020 and asked how it would be implemented. 49. Greece welcomed positive developments in human rights, including the strengthened legislative and institutional framework. Complex migration issues required regional cooperation. Greece therefore requested a brief evaluation of the Praesidium Project. 50. Gabon recognized the efforts made by Italy to combat racism and all forms of discrimination, xenophobia and intolerance and welcomed its efforts to host migrants. 51. Germany commended the adoption of legislation to address prison overcrowding and gender-based violence. It also welcomed the allocation of funds to develop an anti-violence action plan and provide accommodation for victims of violence. 52. Ghana commended the financial and human resources dedicated to the protection of human rights, particularly for migrants, minority groups and women. 53. France noted the promotion of human rights by Italy, both internationally and within the Human Rights Council. It commended the ratification of OP-CAT. 54. Guatemala welcomed the ratification of OP-CAT, the increased sea rescue operations for migrants and the strengthened National Office against Racial Discrimination. Birth registration was an area of concern. 55. The Holy See noted progress in human rights, including the provision of social services for migrants and refugees, the Mare Nostrum operation and the Praesidium Project. 56. Hungary recognized efforts to improve prison conditions and establish a national human rights institution. Stateless persons, mostly Roma, faced bureaucratic obstacles to acquiring citizenship. 57. India referred to concerns about reported violence against women, racist violence and killings of migrants and asked about effective remedies provided to victims. 58. Indonesia considered the commitment of Italy to  search and rescue activities at sea as a good example to follow in handling the exceptional arrival of migrants and respecting their human rights. 59. The Islamic Republic of Iran, while appreciating the positive developments achieved in different fields of human rights, expressed concern at the situation of Roma and Sinti and at sustained racial discrimination against minorities, especially Muslims.  60. Iraq commended the adoption of measures to prevent forcible return and the strategy in support of asylum seekers and persons entitled to international protection. 61. Ireland, while welcoming measures taken, urged Italy to submit its outstanding treaty body reports and consider compiling a second cycle mid-term universal periodic review report. 62. Israel commended the efforts of Italy to implement initiatives on immigration and integration matters and referred to treaty body observations regarding the persistence of hate speech. 63. Japan appreciated the role of Italy and its improved transparency in addressing issues faced by migrants and refugees, and encouraged it to take measures to improve the situation of minorities, such as Roma and Sinti. 64. Kenya asked about progress made in establishing a national human rights institution and, while acknowledging challenges faced, believed that the treatment and reception of migrants and asylum seekers could be improved. 65. Kuwait commended Italy for its close cooperation with United Nations and other international bodies and its commitment to increase official development assistance (ODA). 66. Kyrgyzstan noted that Italy had undertaken significant reforms and provided considerable resources relating to human rights. It commended the efforts Italy was making to save lives at sea. 67. Lebanon welcomed the efforts of Italy to implement the recommendations it had accepted from the first review cycle and its ratification of OP-CAT. 68. Libya commended the ratification of OP-CAT, the adoption of the National Action Plan against Racism, Xenophobia and Intolerance, and actions in support of marginalized and vulnerable groups, to protect the rights of the child and to combat human trafficking. 69. Liechtenstein commended Italy for its ratification of the Rome Statute and OP-CAT and its establishment of a national authority for the rights of detainees. 70. Malaysia welcomed the resources contributed by Italy to the protection of human rights and the National Action Plan against Racism, Xenophobia and Intolerance. 71. Maldives noted that, despite progress regarding women’s and children’s rights, areas of concern remained. It welcomed efforts to protect migrants, refugees and asylum seekers. 72. Mauritania welcomed the measures taken to respect the rights of migrants and to combat racial discrimination. However, greater efforts were required to address the remaining challenges. 73. Mexico noted measures addressing discrimination, gender-based violence and the integration of minorities, which should result in fewer children from those communities living on the street. 74. Montenegro commended the ratification of OP-CAT and the establishment of the national authority for the rights of detainees. It asked how prison overcrowding was addressed. 75. The delegation responded to the questions on cooperation and foreign aid, the Mare Nostrum operation, migration, the ratification of several international instruments and the Slovenian-speaking minority. 76. The title of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation had changed because of a reform that had been passed in 2014, after 27 years. One of the main tasks of the Ministry was to try to increase Italian ODA. Some progress had been achieved; for the third year in a row, Italy had increased the budget allocated to cooperation and foreign aid by 10 per cent. 77. Italy was facing an extraordinary burden vis-à-vis the central Mediterranean route and the number of migrants that were arriving, which was linked to a historical phenomenon. According to data from the International Organization for Migration (IOM), while 3 per cent of the global population was made up of migrants, 90 per cent of that movement was intra-continental. The issue was not only an Italian matter, it was a European issue. The long-term scenario that Europe had to face vis-à-vis migration would need to take into account that in 1950, the European population had been double that of the African population and that, according to the average forecast of United Nations demographics, in 2050, two generations’ time, the population of Africa would be three times that of Europe. 78. Migration had to be managed and migrants’ conditions improved, but that could not be reduced solely to an issue of border control or border management. Efforts made would need to be combined with international development and foreign aid and a model for the future of Africa. A new conversation about the post-2015 development agenda should be able to provide a common grammar to deal with that issue, which would be one of the legacies of the Italian presidency of the Council of the European Union. 79. When referring to migrants, many delegations were talking about migrants and potentially, asylum seekers. Formerly, 80 per cent of the people coming from African or Asian countries had been seeking a better future in Europe. In 2013/2014, almost 75 per cent of those arriving were coming from countries at war, countries in post-conflict situations and fragile countries. The issue of migration could not be considered as a stand-alone issue and should encompass the broader picture that linked migrants, asylum seekers, political fragility and instability and the crises that were taking place in 2014. Italy was not, politically or geopolitically, in a position to deal with that. 80. Previously, the process for the ratification of international instruments had been somewhat protracted. However, the Government now intended to ratify many pending instruments quickly. Indeed, the ratification process of a number of pending treaties was already under way. The ratification of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (OP-ICESCR) had been completed and the ratification instrument would be deposited in the near future. Additionally, the ratification process of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure had been initiated. Despite the fact that Italy had not ratified the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW), the Italian legislative framework already guaranteed the rights of regular and irregular migrants. Moreover, Italy was committed to promoting a debate at the European level on that topic. 81. Italy was committed to combating racism and working for successful interaction among cultures, traditions and beliefs. At the national level, the country would continue to make all efforts to ensure that the global challenges posed by racism were met in the most appropriate ways. 82. Some 31 per cent of the Members of Parliament were women. Furthermore, a recent law had paved the way for an increase in female representation on boards of publicly listed and State-owned companies. 83. The Government was strongly committed to countering all forms of religious discrimination. 84. The Government had recently formally reaffirmed before the parliament its intention to establish a national human rights institution; three bills related to the institution had been introduced and would be debated. 85. Morocco enquired about measures taken at the local and national levels to promote human rights education in schools and universities. 86. The Netherlands commended Italy for promoting the abolition of capital punishment and recognized the significant challenges it faced owing to the growing number of migrants. 87. Nicaragua noted that migration was a significant challenge that Italy should not confront alone; Europe should address the phenomenon using a regional approach. 88. The Niger encouraged Italy to finalize its ongoing initiatives to implement the recommendations from the first cycle that it had not been able to implement by the second cycle, particularly the establishment of a national human rights commission in accordance with the Paris Principles. 89. Norway commended Italy for its efforts to save migrants at sea. However, it noted the high number of pending human rights cases and judgements against Italy before the European Court of Human Rights. 90. Pakistan noted the efforts made by Italy in implementing the recommendations received during the first review cycle. 91. Peru commended Italy for the adoption of law 67/2014 which provided for the decriminalization of illegal migration, and the establishment of the National Action Plan against Racism, Xenophobia and Intolerance. 92. The Philippines commended Italy for its action in saving lives at sea and the Mare Nostrum operation. It expressed concern about domestic regulations on the detention of irregular migrants. 93. Portugal praised Italy for the priority given to the protection of the rights of migrants and for the comprehensive policies adopted and asked for information on the measures taken by the National Office against Discrimination.  94. Qatar welcomed the steps taken to improve immigration and integration policies. It commended action to combat human trafficking and to strengthen inter-institutional cooperation on trafficking and asylum. 95. The Republic of Moldova appreciated the efforts of Italy in protecting migrants, applauded its action to save lives at sea and recognized measures taken to combat trafficking in human beings. 96. Romania welcomed the ratification by Italy of several conventions and its adoption of various policies and noted its actions to combat racial discrimination and violence against women. 97. The Russian Federation commended Italy for its work to guarantee human rights. It urged Italy to adopt effective measures to stabilize the situation in respect to combating and preventing violations of migrants’ rights, including by ensuring the functioning of the humanitarian missions to rescue irregular migrants from Africa and the Middle East who were in peril in the Mediterranean Sea. 98. Saudi Arabia commended the introduction by the State police of specialized courses on investigative techniques covering crimes against children, sexual offences and domestic violence. 99. Senegal noted the significant progress made in relation to education, health, services for vulnerable persons and the integration of migrants. 100. Serbia welcomed the ratification of OP-CAT and activities to integrate minority groups and took positive note of the legislative measures to reduce prison overcrowding. 101. Sierra Leone welcomed achievements in various areas of human rights. It noted that more should be done to address racism, violence against women, child sex abuse and juvenile justice, and to increase ODA. 102. Slovenia noted the establishment of a panel addressing the Slovenian minority in Italy and asked how the rights of that minority would be guaranteed within local government reform. 103. South Sudan commended Italy for its use of house arrest rather than custodial sentences for mothers. However, it was concerned at discrimination and xenophobia against migrants. 104. Spain commended measures to protect the right of persons with disabilities and the ratification of the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence. It was concerned by increased racism and xenophobia. 105. Sri Lanka urged Italy to consider ratifying ICRMW. It commended Italy for its adoption of the National Action Plan against Racism, Xenophobia and Intolerance. 106. The Sudan commended action taken to combat trafficking, expressed concern regarding the inhuman situation in reception centres and urged the Government to take all necessary measures to ensure respect for the rights of migrants. 107. Sweden welcomed the ratification by Italy of the Rome Statute. It recalled the obligation of non-refoulement, noting that Italy summarily returned persons arriving from Greek ports. 108. Switzerland noted the significant measures taken to implement accepted recommendations from the first review cycle and indicated that the creation of a national mechanism for the prevention of torture was vital. 109. Thailand supported the international cooperation of Italy in addressing irregular migration and human trafficking and welcomed its efforts to accelerate asylum applications and allow detainees to receive professional training. 110. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia encouraged Italy to establish a national human rights institution that was fully in line with the Paris Principles, and to combat racial violence against the Roma and the Sinti. 111. Togo welcomed the Mare Nostrum operation, which had saved thousands of lives at sea, and commended the decriminalization of illegal migration. 112. Trinidad and Tobago noted that Italy had increased resources to support human rights policies, ratified international human rights instruments and endeavoured to fight discrimination. 113. Tunisia welcomed the action taken in recent years to assist a large number of immigrants and asylum seekers and encouraged Italy to pursue such action. 114. Turkey noted the achievements of Italy in terms of immigration and integration policies and commended the increased capacity of its reception centres and the Praesidium Project. 115. Ukraine commended Italy for its ratification of OP-CAT and its cooperation with OHCHR. Ukraine encouraged Italy to continue to take steps to protect the human rights of migrants and to establish an independent national human rights institution. 116. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland welcomed the Italian Action Plan on the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights and the efforts Italy had made to reduce prison overcrowding. 117. The United States of America commended the Mare Nostrum operation, but was concerned at the poor conditions in the migrant reception centres and at the level of violence against the Roma. 118. Uruguay encouraged Italy to continue promoting gender equity. It welcomed legislative action and consultations on the establishment of a national human rights commission. 119. Uzbekistan welcomed the establishment of a number of human rights mechanisms, including the national authority on detainees’ rights. It noted concerns about discrimination against migrants and ethnic and religious minorities, and violence against women and children. 120. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela encouraged Italy to adopt the draft legislation concerning the establishment of a national human rights commission based on the Paris Principles. 121. Viet Nam encouraged Italy to strengthen action to tackle discrimination based on race or gender, to protect vulnerable groups affected by austerity measures, migrants and minorities, and to combat human trafficking. 122. Algeria praised the implementation of recommendations from the first review cycle, but noted that the human and other resources allocated to the National Office against Racial Discrimination had been reduced, despite the fact that its mandate had been extended. 123. Angola expressed the hope that additional resources would be allocated to the education sector to assist needy families and integrate minorities, including immigrant children, into the education system. 124. Argentina welcomed the fact that priority was being given to ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (ICPPED). It expressed concern regarding respect for the rights of migrants. 125. Armenia commended the ratification of the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings and the implementation of social protection programmes for victims of trafficking. 126. Australia commended Italy for its response to challenges posed by increased flows of irregular migration. It noted that the slow pace of judicial process in Italy and prison overcrowding undermined the right to a fair trial and the rights of prisoners and detainees. 127. Azerbaijan welcomed the ratification of OP-CAT by Italy and noted the concerns expressed by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination regarding the persistence of stereotypes associating ethnic minorities and non-citizens with criminality and Islam with terrorism. 128. Bahrain urged Italy to increase efforts to prevent and combat discrimination against ethnic and religious minorities and to step up action to prevent trafficking and protect victims of trafficking. 129. Bangladesh noted concerns expressed by treaty bodies at the negative portrayal of migrants and Roma, and at stereotypes associating ethnic minorities and non-citizens with criminality and Islam with terrorism. 130. Botswana noted with satisfaction legislative and policy measures adopted in support of freedom of expression and freedom of religion, the fight against human trafficking, and the protection of women and children. 131. Brazil welcomed the implementation of migration-related recommendations from the first review cycle. However, it expressed concern regarding discriminatory treatment of migrants and Roma and stressed the need to adopt specific legislation on violence against women. 132. Bulgaria welcomed the fact that preventing human trafficking and protecting victims of trafficking remained a priority for Italy. Bulgaria commended the adoption of the National Action Plan against Racism, Xenophobia and Intolerance. 133. Burundi noted with appreciation that education was compulsory for all, including foreign minors. It welcomed the strengthened and expanded role of the National Office against Racial Discrimination. 134. Canada requested an update on improved protection against all forms of discrimination. Canada was concerned about the social inclusion of women and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) persons and urged continued action to prevent violent acts against women and girls. 135. Responding to additional questions on migration, the delegation noted that there had been an approximately 40 per cent increase in the number of asylum applications in 2013, 67 per cent of which been accepted. 136. The delegation also noted that various measures taken over the years aimed at the integration and inclusion of the Roma, Sinti and Caminanti communities had demonstrated the complexity of the situation. Italy was committed to implementing a number of recommendations that had been made by the European Commission and the United Nations and was working in compliance with all relevant international human rights instruments. 137. The country was developing and implementing national and regional initiatives, as well as local plans, for social inclusion. 138. Additional measures had been adopted to address prison overcrowding and a national authority for the protection of the rights of detainees and prisoners had been established.  139. The Ministry of Education had launched an experimental training plan for teachers and school managers that should assist with integration. 140. Action was being taken to raise awareness about preventing violence against women and promoting education and inclusion of persons with disabilities. The Praesidium Project was implemented by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, IOM, Save the Children and the Italian Red Cross, with the support of the Italian Ministry of the Interior, focusing their activities on the most vulnerable categories of migrants, such as unaccompanied minors. 141. Numerous initiatives had been adopted in favour of the Slovenian minority, including in the public sphere, at the provincial and municipal levels, as well as by bodies holding public service concessions. 142. Corporal punishment had been unlawful punishment in Italian in schools since 1928. 143. The Italian delegation expressed gratitude to the States that had participated in the review and said that all the questions and recommendations would be seriously examined, in an open and cooperative spirit, as a matter of priority. Replies would be provided before the twenty-eighth session of the Human Rights Council, in March 2015. 144. Italy continued to regard the universal periodic review process with confidence and expectation and would continue to participate actively in future sessions in order to improve human rights situations in all countries.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**  ** The conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 145. The following recommendations will be examined by Italy, which will respond to them in due course, but no later than the twenty-eighth session of the Human Rights Council, in March 2015: 145.1 Study the possibility of acceding to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW) (Egypt); 145.2 Consider ratifying ICRMW (Chile); Consider ratifying ICRMW (Indonesia); 145.3 Ratify ICRMW (Ghana); Ratify ICRMW (Sierra Leone); Ratify ICRMW (Uruguay); Ratify ICRMW (Peru); Ratify ICRMW (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 145.4 Ratify ICRMW (Senegal); 145.5 Complete the ratification process of ICRMW, as recommended by several treaty bodies and special rapporteurs (Turkey); 145.6 Strengthen the legal framework to take better account of migrants and migrant workers, in particular by ratifying ICRMW (Algeria); 145.7 Consider ratifying the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (ICPPED) (Chile); 145.8 Continue its efforts towards the ratification of ICPPED (Argentina); 145.9 Speed up the ratification of ICPPED (Iraq); 145.10 Take all steps necessary to accelerate the ratification process of ICPPED (Burundi); 145.11 Ratify ICPPED (Portugal); Ratify ICPPED (Costa Rica); Ratify ICPPED (Peru); Ratify ICPPED (Ghana); Ratify ICPPED (France); Ratify ICPPED (Togo); 145.12 Ratify ICPPED in as timely a fashion as possible (Japan); 145.13 Consider ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (OP-CRC-IC) (Gabon); 145.14 Ratify OP-CRC-IC (Costa Rica); Ratify OP-CRC-IC (Portugal); Ratify OP-CRC-IC (Montenegro); 145.15 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (OP-ICESCR) (Montenegro); 145.16 Ratify OP-ICESCR (Spain); 145.17 Ratify OP-ICESCR (Portugal); Ratify OP-ICESCR (Uruguay); 145.18 Accede to the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, and streamline the administrative process in order to reduce the number of stateless persons (Hungary); 145.19 Ratify the Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute, if possible with a view to contributing to the activation of the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court (ICC) over the crime of aggression at the beginning of 2017 (Liechtenstein); 145.20 Ratify the Additional Protocol to the Convention on cybercrime, concerning the criminalisation of acts of a racist and xenophobic nature, including holocaust denial, committed through computer systems (Israel); 145.21 Fully align its national legislation with the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC) (Sweden); 145.22 Fully align its national legislation with the Rome Statute of the ICC, including by incorporating provisions to investigate and prosecute perpetrators of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes effectively before its national courts, and to ratify the Kampala Amendments to the Rome Statute of the ICC (Estonia); 145.23 Review domestic legislation with a view to implementing the provisions of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women in the national law (Russian Federation); 145.24 Scale up efforts in Italy to face the scourge of drugs that destroy human beings and societies, and therefore to enact additional legislation that prevents it (Lebanon); 145.25 Adopt further legislation that restricts and prevents minors from all consumption of drugs, alcohol and tobacco (Lebanon); 145.26 Continue stepping up efforts to establish an independent national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Malaysia);  145.27 Continue its efforts to establish a national human rights institution, in line with the Paris Principles (Bulgaria); 145.28 Speed up the process of creating a National Human Rights Commission in conformity with the Paris Principles (Chad); 145.29 Speed up the process of the establishment of a national human rights institution in conformity with Paris Principles (Indonesia); 145.30 Expedite the creation of an independent national human rights institution in line with the Paris Principles (Bahrain); 145.31 Complete the process of creating an autonomous and independent national human rights institution, in conformity with the Paris Principles (Chile); 145.32 Complete the establishment of a National Human Rights Institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Morocco); 145.33 Complete the process of establishing a National Human Rights Commission in conformity with the Paris Principles (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 145.34 Continue and complete the current process for the establishment of a national commission for the promotion and protection of human rights (Togo); 145.35 Conclude, as a matter of priority, the process leading to the establishment of a national human rights institution, with a broad human rights mandate (Portugal); 145.36 Finalize the process of the establishment of a national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Senegal); 145.37 Redouble efforts to establish as soon as possible an independent national human rights institution, in conformity with the Paris Principles (Costa Rica); 145.38 Increase efforts to establish a national human rights institution (NHRI) in line with the Paris Principles (Azerbaijan); 145.39 Foster the finalization of the existing initiative to set up a National Human Rights Institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Peru); 145.40 Move quickly to establish a national human rights institution in full compliance with the Paris Principles (Kenya); 145.41 Continue its efforts to conform its National Human Rights Institution with the Paris Principles (Egypt); 145.42 Continue working to establish a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Guatemala); 145.43 Establish a national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles before the end of 2015 (Denmark); 145.44 Establish a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Pakistan); 145.45 Establish a National Human Rights Institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Uruguay); 145.46 Set up a National Human Rights Institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (France); 145.47 Establish a national human rights institution, in accordance with the Paris Principles, with a broad human rights mandate, and following a participatory process including civil society (Ireland); 145.48 Fully involve civil society and other relevant stakeholders in the expeditious establishment of a human rights institution based on the Paris Principles and ensure its functional and financial independence (India); 145.49 Implement, as soon as possible, the obligations under the Optional Protocol to the United Nations Convention against Torture and establish an independent and effective national protection mechanism that has the necessary resources (Switzerland); 145.50 Step up its efforts to appoint the members of the national authority and ensure the effective exercise of its functions (Liechtenstein);  145.51 Operationalize its national authority for the protection of detainees (Morocco); 145.52 Continue the ongoing efforts, particularly concerning awareness, education and training in the field of human rights (Kuwait); 145.53 Consider developing Human Rights Indicators as suggested by OHCHR as an instrument that allows for a more precise and coherent evaluation of national human rights policies (Portugal); 145.54 Further institutionalize measures to protect and promote the rights of the child (Viet Nam); 145.55 Submit its overdue reports to the Committee against Torture and the Human Rights Committee (Ghana); 145.56 Continue to intensify its ongoing efforts to strengthen women’s representation in leadership roles and decision-making positions (Cyprus); 145.57 Adopt additional measures to combat gender inequity and gender-based discrimination (Trinidad and Tobago); 145.58 Adopt a national strategy for the advancement of women, and end prevailing cultural stereotypes of the role of women in all fields (Bahrain); 145.59 Adopt measures to put an end to all kinds of discrimination, particularly discrimination between men and women in the workplace (France); 145.60 Further introduce effective measures to enhance gender equity in the labour market (Viet Nam); 145.61 Continue to fight against all forms of discrimination (Djibouti); 145.62 Continue raising awareness and promoting tolerance and diversity in society (Israel); 145.63 Strengthen the institutional framework to combat all forms of racial discrimination and incitement to hatred, in particular against migrants (Algeria); 145.64 Take concrete steps for the elimination of all forms of discrimination against minorities (Pakistan); 145.65 Continue to combat any form of discrimination, as well as stereotypes of persons belonging to minorities (Romania); 145.66 Increase its efforts to prevent and combat racial and religious discrimination (Azerbaijan); 145.67 Continue focused efforts to address racism, discrimination and xenophobia (Trinidad and Tobago); 145.68 Continue strengthening mechanisms to combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and other forms of related intolerance (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 145.69 Prevent all forms of discrimination and vilification and deliberate negative stereotyping of the Roma community, Muslims and migrants (Bangladesh); 145.70 Adopt a national plan against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, including measures to prevent and fight racist and xenophobic violence (Brazil); 145.71 To conduct an active campaign against the creation of negative stereotypes in relation to migrants and minorities, to step up measures to prevent discrimination against Muslims and to strengthen the dialogue with the Muslim communities (Uzbekistan); 145.72 Continue with the measures taken to improve the situation of migrants, particularly with a view to reducing the discrimination that they suffer from (Argentina); 145.73 Increase its efforts to combat racial discrimination against Muslims and foster dialogue with Muslim communities (Iran (Islamic Republic of));  145.74 Continue the efforts concerning combating discrimination on the basis of religion (Saudi Arabia); 145.75 Redouble efforts in its refusal of religious intolerance and xenophobia (Mauritania); 145.76 Ensure prosecution in cases where xenophobic crimes against racial and religious minorities are being committed (Pakistan); 145.77 Further strengthen existing policies and legislation on non-discrimination to reduce racist and xenophobic behaviour and manifestations (Spain); 145.78 Engage intensively in the struggle against racist speech in politics in order to contain its negative impact on people’s attitudes towards foreigners and in the sports world (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 145.79 Continue to fight effectively against racist statements that persist in political discourse in order to avoid associating migrants, insecurity and unemployment (Togo); 145.80 Intensify efforts to combat discrimination and intolerance, especially towards Muslims, migrants and people of African descent and encourage senior State officials and politicians to take clear positions against racist and xenophobic political discourse (Tunisia); 145.81 Reinforce measures to combat attacks and hate speech against minority groups, by emphasizing prevention and follow-up of these acts (Côte d’Ivoire); 145.82 Condemn all statements of a racist nature and increase awareness-raising, particularly directed at youth, of the unacceptability of racism (Norway); 145.83 Implement as a priority the National Action Plan against Racism, Xenophobia and Intolerance (Cuba); 145.84 Provide the necessary financial and human resources to strengthen the implementation of its National Action Plan against Racism, Xenophobia and Intolerance, including by intensifying efforts to conduct investigations promptly and taking action against the perpetrators of racist and xenophobic speeches and public statements (Malaysia); 145.85 Adopt additional measures for the fight against xenophobia, racial discrimination and discrimination of Roma women, and among other measures, strengthen the capacity of the National Office against Racial Discrimination in order to change the perception by the society of women of marginal and minority communities (Chile); 145.86 Increase the budget of and strengthen the National Office against Racial Discrimination (Sierra Leone); 145.87 Take measures to ensure that the National Office against Racial Discrimination (UNAR) is independent and adequately resourced (India); 145.88 Continue to strengthen the National Office against Racial Discrimination with the view to combating hate speech and protect Roma, racial and religious minorities including Muslims from violence and discrimination (Pakistan); 145.89 Strengthen the National Office against Racial Discrimination (UNAR), as Italy had accepted in the previous UPR cycle (Uruguay); 145.90 Address racial discrimination and cases of racist violence involving destruction of property and the murders of a number of migrants (Ghana); 145.91 Strengthen protection of women and children, ethnic minorities, migrants, persons with disabilities, older persons and other vulnerable groups (China); 145.92 Continue paying special attention to the protection of the rights of vulnerable groups of the population, in particular, children, women, persons with disabilities, older persons, national minorities, especially Roma (Russian Federation); 145.93 Raise public awareness on the rights of vulnerable groups of people, as stipulated in the Italian legal system (Thailand); 145.94 Allocate the necessary resources to the fight against discrimination on the basis of gender and sexual orientation, so as to accelerate progress on this matter (Spain); 145.95 Accelerate and strengthen legislative and educational actions to combat discrimination in all its forms, particularly discrimination on the basis of sex and sexual orientation (Canada); 145.96 Include sexual orientation as grounds for protection against hate speech (Canada); 145.97 Take concrete steps to adopt the legislation necessary to follow up to Prime Minister Renzi’s announcement to work on the recognition of same-sex relationships in Italy, as part of Italy’s efforts to further strengthen measures to combat discrimination and violence based on sexual orientation and gender identity (Netherlands); 145.98 Ensure the equal rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) people by legally recognizing same-sex marriage and civil partnerships (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 145.99 Implement effective domestic measures to ensure all acts of torture are offences under its criminal law (Australia); 145.100 Adopt additional measures to prevent all forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment of persons in detention (France); 145.101 Pursue further its endeavours to combat prison overcrowding and to guarantee that all detainees are treated with dignity (Hungary); 145.102 Take measures to enhance the efficiency of the judicial system and reduce overcrowding in prisons (Australia); 145.103 Adopt a national strategy for improving the situation in the penitentiary system (Russian Federation); 145.104 Further improve the living conditions in State penitentiaries and juvenile detention centres (Thailand); 145.105 Develop and implement the national anti-violence action plan at the earliest possible date (Germany); 145.106 Continue with its efforts regarding violence within the family and with the enforcement of the three categories of aggravating circumstances included in the Italian Criminal Code, in order to prevent violence in all its forms (Dominican Republic); 145.107 Consider adopting specific laws on combating violence against women, both at home and in the work place (India); 145.108 Strengthen domestic legislations to prevent sexual violence against women and provide necessary support to the victims (Maldives); 145.109 To adopt effective measures to combat violence against women and prevent their occupational segregation (Uzbekistan); 145.110 Pass and implement legislation to address violence against women (Sierra Leone); 145.111 Combat violence against women by implementing the Istanbul Convention, which entered into force August 1, 2014, and finalize Italy’s National Action Plan (United States of America); 145.112 Undertake comprehensive measures to address violence against women and to ensure that victims have immediate protection (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 145.113 Take all necessary measures to address violence against women as well as gender inequality in particular in the workplace and in the context of pregnancy or family status (Ireland); 145.114 Address the legal gaps in the area of child custody and include relevant provisions relating to protection of women who are the victims of domestic violence as recommended by the Special Rapporteur on violence against women (Botswana); 145.115 Take the necessary measures to ensure that national protection laws against sexual violence, including in the domestic context, be applied at all levels consistently and effectively to fight against impunity (Switzerland); 145.116 Take the necessary measures to maintain existing and/or set up new anti-violence shelters to assist and protect women victims of violence (Malaysia); 145.117 Allocate sufficient funds for the effective protection of victims who report gender-based violence and focus on training and education in order to prevent such acts of violence, especially within the family (Germany); 145.118 Consolidate the measures aimed at combating violence against women and at achieving social reintegration of those women who are victims of human trafficking (Romania); 145.119 Continue its efforts directed towards fighting the trafficking of persons (Armenia); 145.120 Take further steps in order to strengthen the protection of victims of trafficking (Azerbaijan); 145.121 Continue its efforts regarding the combat of the phenomenon of trafficking in persons (Sudan); 145.122 Expand efforts to combat human trafficking and account for other forms of trafficking, such as labour exploitation and forced begging (Australia); 145.123 Finalize the first national plan to combat trafficking in persons, and provide all necessary resources to ensure the successful implementation (Qatar); 145.124 Improve identification of victims of trafficking in human beings by setting up a coherent national mechanism of identification and referral of such cases, including among unaccompanied minors, irregular migrants and asylum seekers (Republic of Moldova); 145.125 Provide follow-up to the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings with a particular concern on unaccompanied minors (Holy See); 145.126 Enact legislation to enshrine the 1996 Supreme Court ruling in legislation and explicitly prohibit all corporal punishment of children in the home (Liechtenstein); 145.127 Explicitly prohibit all corporal punishment of children, bringing legislation into line with the 1996 Supreme Court ruling against violence in child-rearing (Sweden); 145.128 Protect children from all types of abuses by ensuring rigorous implementation and monitoring of existing frameworks to capture all threats to all children (Maldives); 145.129 Increase use of non-custodial measures during the period before the imposition of a sentence (Hungary); 145.130 Review criminal and civil justice procedures in order to improve the efficiency of the judiciary with a view to significantly reducing the backlog before the courts, and the time taken for cases to be continued, before its next Universal Periodic Review (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 145.131 Take further measures to reduce the backlog of judicial cases, both nationally and at the European Court of Human Rights (Norway); 145.132 Provide, in accordance with its obligations under international human rights law, effective protection for the family as the fundamental and natural unit of society (Egypt); 145.133 To promote and protect mass media pluralism by including in relevant legislation the principle of incompatibility of holding elected or government office with ownership and control of the mass media (Uzbekistan); 145.134 Investigate and prosecute all perpetrators of violence and intimidation crimes against journalists (Azerbaijan); 145.135 Take the necessary legal measures to protect journalists and investigate all acts of intimidation and violence against journalists (Botswana); 145.136 Eliminate the practice of indefinite internships for graduates of universities and technical schools and replace these with paid employment opportunities, both in the public and private sectors (Mexico); 145.137 Facilitate the development of small businesses for both Italian citizens and migrants and establish programmes to encourage the economic and social integration of refugees (Mexico); 145.138 Mainstream the issues of immigrant women into its employment policies and programmes (Kyrgyzstan); 145.139 Continue its efforts to take further action to prohibit discrimination in employment and take further measures to reduce unemployment, especially among immigrants (Sri Lanka); 145.140 Develop credit mechanisms and programmes to facilitate the acquisition of housing (Mexico); 145.141 Further strengthen the existing mechanisms on the promotion and protection of the rights of persons with disabilities (Ethiopia); 145.142 Double the efforts to protect and strengthen the rights of persons with disabilities (Saudi Arabia); 145.143 Continue strengthening with specific measures the implementation of the two-year programme of action to promote the rights and inclusion of persons with disabilities (Spain); 145.144 Further protect and promote the rights of minorities in the country (Armenia); 145.145 Take concrete steps to implement the national Roma strategy within the next two years (Germany); 145.146 Effectively implement the National Strategy for the Inclusion of Roma (United States of America); 145.147 Ensure a consistent and rapid implementation of the National Strategy for the Inclusion of Roma, Sinti and Travellers Communities through concrete measures at the local level (Finland); 145.148 Follow up regularly the implementation of the strategy by actively involving representatives of the communities concerned and based upon the findings from the follow-up of the strategy to make necessary revisions to the strategy in order to improve the living conditions of the Roma, Sinti and Travellers communities (Finland); 145.149 Continue efforts for implementation of the National Strategy for the Inclusion of Roma, Sinti, and Travellers and to further promote Roma inclusion in local communities, with specific regard to providing necessary assistance and support to children and adolescents in the field of education (Serbia); 145.150 Adopt further legislative and educational measures that diminish economic inequality, joblessness and discrimination, especially for the Roma, Sinti, and Travel communities (Holy See); 145.151 Consider taking further measures to combat all forms of discrimination against the Roma community, and ensure equal opportunities for the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights, including education, health and housing (Sri Lanka); 145.152 Adopt legislation on access to vocational training and develop programmes to improve the integration of foreigners and minority children in schools (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 145.153 Take steps to prevent discrimination against women belonging to disadvantaged groups as well as institute measures to decrease dropout rates among Sinti and Roma girls (Ghana); 145.154 Provide the necessary resources to improve the schooling of children which belong to vulnerable groups and to combat the early dropout rates of children (Algeria); 145.155 Take concrete measures to ensure effective access to education by Roma and Sinti children as well as other vulnerable groups (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 145.156 Continue to strengthen the laudable initiatives to ensure a fully integrated school system for migrants, ethnic minorities, women, girls and boys, notably from the Roma communities (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 145.157 Adopt the appropriate measures to ensure the full implementation of Article 26 of the Law no. 38/2001 on facilitation of the election of candidates belonging to the Slovenian minority, also in light of the present institutional reforms (Slovenia);  145.158 Continue to fully implement the legislative provisions guaranteeing oral and written use of Slovenian language in public administration, public life and as teaching language at schools (Slovenia);  145.159 Develop policies that further enhance the protection of the rights of migrants and minority populations (Trinidad and Tobago); 145.160 Reinforce measures aiming at the protection of the rights of migrants and asylum seekers and the improvement of their conditions (Côte d’Ivoire); 145.161 Continue reinforcing measures to guarantee respect for the human rights of migrants (Cuba); 145.162 Continue reinforcing and protecting the rights of migrants (Djibouti); 145.163 Fully align its migration and asylum policy in accordance with international law (Kenya);  145.164 Continue to give consideration to the human rights perspective in its migration policy and implementation, in collaboration with other European countries which are final destinations of migrants (Japan);  145.165 Reactivate the dialogue on migration with the North African States, namely Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco and Egypt (South Sudan);  145.166 Continue to review and periodically assess its immigration laws and policies, taking into consideration the recommendations made by relevant United Nations agencies, human rights treaty bodies and special procedures, and to ensure that the rights of migrants are fully safeguarded, in accordance with international human rights standards (Philippines); 145.167 Take further efforts to improve the conditions of migrants and asylum seekers who arrive to the Italian territories, and ensure that they are provided with their guaranteed rights (Qatar);  145.168 Continue working at the national level to protect the human rights of migrants, including those who have requested refuge or asylum, and in particular with regard to the principle of non-refoulement (Guatemala); 145.169 Continue to strengthen its national migration policy, bearing in mind important pillars like protection, integration, non-discrimination and non-refoulement (Nicaragua); 145.170 Suspend summary returns to Greece (Sweden); 145.171 Strengthen other efforts already in practice which provide life-saving assistance for migrants and initiate the new Asylum, Migration and Integration Fund 2014–2020 (Holy See); 145.172 Finalize the Programme of Action for the new Asylum, Migration and Integration Fund 2 014–2020 in due time frame (Turkey); 145.173 Develop a comprehensive national system of data collection, analysis and dissemination regarding immigration policies and practices to be used as a foundation for rights-based policymaking on migration (Israel);  145.174 Ensure that all those involved in the reception process for migrants have the training, time and ability to identify persons who want to apply for asylum. Anyone claiming to be an unaccompanied minor should benefit, without exception, from the specific protections guaranteed under Italian law, pending a properly conducted age determination (Netherlands); 145.175 Ensure that the system for receiving and registering immigrants and asylum seekers is of a high standard, both in regards to capacity and expediency. In particular, that extra attention is given to minors (Norway); 145.176 Work with international partners in responding to the protection needs of maritime migrants, asylum seekers and refugees, by developing standardized processing procedures and making necessary upgrades to improve conditions of reception and expulsion centres (United States of America); 145.177 Improve the facilities in the reception centres (Sudan); 145.178 Allow undocumented migrants to protect their rights and to file complaints irrespective of immigration status (Kyrgyzstan); 145.179 Introduce legislation to ensure assistance and protection for unaccompanied children seeking asylum (Denmark); 145.180 Ensure that every child, particularly unaccompanied minors, whether on the high seas or on its territory, who seeks to enter Italy, has the right to an individual consideration of his/her circumstances and is provided prompt access to asylum and other relevant national and international procedures and protective measures (Brazil); 145.181 Strengthen mechanisms to integrate migrant children in the school system (Angola); 145.182 Include all migrants irrespective of their status within the national plans and programmes to integrate and ensure their human rights (Bangladesh); 145.183 Implement its commitment to increase the ODA (Official Development Aid) for developing countries, particularly least developed countries (China); 145.184 Increase overseas development assistance to aim at achieving the agreed target of 0.7 per cent of GDP (Sierra Leone); 145.185 Continue its efforts to reach quickly the international target of 0.7 per cent ODA (Tunisia); 145.186 Raise the level of ODA to 0.7 per cent of GDP (Bangladesh). 146. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English only]   Composition of the delegation The delegation of Italy was headed by Mr. Lapo Pistelli, State Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, and composed of the following members: • Min. Plen. Gianludovico De Martino, President, Inter-Ministerial Committee for Human Rights, General Directorate for Political Affairs; • Ms. Cristina Carenza, General Directorate for Political Affairs; Ms. Stefania Dall’Oglio, Secretary-General, Inter-Ministerial Committee for Human Rights, General Directorate for Political Affairs; • Ms. Cristiana Carletti, Expert, Inter-Ministerial Committee for Human Rights, General Directorate for Political Affairs; • Ms. Maja Bova, Expert, Inter-Ministerial Committee for Human Rights, General Directorate for Political Affairs; • Ms. Silvia Dodero, Expert, Inter-Ministerial Committee for Human Rights, General Directorate for Political Affairs;   Italian Parliament • Hon. Eleonora Cimbro, Observer Member of the Chamber of Deputies, Foreign Affairs Commission; • Mrs. Francesca Piazza, Observer Parliamentary Counsellor, Foreign Affairs Commission;   Other Administrations • Mrs. Cristina Bianchini, Presidency of the Council of Ministers; • Mrs. Antonella Graziadei, Department of Equal Opportunities, Presidency of the Council of Ministers; • Mrs. Elena Maria Grazia Falcomatà, Department of Equal Opportunities, Presidency of the Council of Ministers; • Mrs. Franca Farris, Ministry of the Interior • Mrs. Mariacarla Bocchino, Ministry of the Interior; • Mrs. Maria Emanuela Guerra, Ministry of Justice; • Mrs. Liliana La Sala, Ministry of Health; • Mrs. Serena Battilomo, Ministry of Health;   Permanent Mission of Italy • H.E. Mr. Maurizio Enrico Serra, Ambassador, Permanent Representative; • Mr. Paolo Cuculi, Minister Plenipotentiary; • Mr. Marco Lapadura, Counsellor; • Mrs. Simona Battiloro, Counsellor.     