  United Nations  A/HRC/28/13    General Assembly  Distr.: General 23 December 2014 English Original: English/French  Human Rights Council Twenty-eighth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   Madagascar Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–107 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–31 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  32–107 7  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  108–110 14  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................   24   Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its twentieth session from 27 October to 7 November 2014. The review of Madagascar was held at the 11th meeting, on 3 November 2014. The delegation of Madagascar was headed by Noeline Ramanantenasoa, Garde des sceaux, Ministre de la Justice. At its 17th meeting, held on 6 November 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on Madagascar. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Madagascar: Algeria, Costa Rica and Indonesia. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Madagascar:  (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/MDG/1);   (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/MDG/2);  (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/MDG/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, Germany, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United States of America was transmitted to Madagascar through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR).  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation of Madagascar, headed by Noeline Ramanantenasoa, Minister of Justice, indicated that the national report had been prepared by the Interministerial Committee for the Drafting of Human Rights Reports, with the assistance of all stakeholders at national and regional level and representatives of civil society organizations. The implementation of the recommendations had been greatly affected by the crisis of 2009 as well as by the sanctions taken against Madagascar and their negative effects on all sectors. However, with the support of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and other bilateral and multilateral partners, it had been possible to implement certain recommendations. Others had been rejected, including the dismantling of the Special Intervention Force ordered by the Council of Ministers following the investiture of the President of the fourth Republic; the consideration by the Government Council and Council of Ministers of the bill ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty, and the tabling before the National Assembly of the private parliamentary bill abolishing the death penalty. 6. With regard to recommendations that had been accepted and implemented, Madagascar noted in particular the return to constitutional order following the holding of peaceful presidential and legislative elections; the enactment of Act No. 2014-007 establishing the Independent National Human Rights Commission in accordance with the Principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles); the accession to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families by Parliament in November 2013, and the consideration by the Government Council and Council of Ministers of draft legislation authorizing the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty. 7. Other recommendations that had been implemented included wider referral to the Constitutional Court of cases involving violations of fundamental rights recognized in the Constitution; consideration by the Government Council and Council of Ministers prior to submission to Parliament of the bill establishing the Parliamentary Court of Justice with jurisdiction to try the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister, members of the Government, the two Presidents of the two chambers of Parliament and the President of the Constitutional Court; and the inclusion of human rights modules in training programmes for law enforcement officials in the major professional training establishments for the legal profession, the police, the gendarmerie, the prison administration and the armed forces, with the aim of preventing the excessive use of force and promoting respect for human rights in the performance of daily duties. 8. In response to questions prepared in advance, Madagascar indicated that, with regard to special procedures, it had formalized the standing invitation to special procedures mandate holders, on 26 August 2011, and had received the successive visits of three special rapporteurs since 2011. Following the elections held in 2013, the visit by the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions had been postponed. Regarding the acceptance of the individual complaints procedure for all ratified conventions, given that the admissibility of such complaints was dependent upon the exhaustion of domestic remedies, Madagascar considered that the public should be made aware beforehand of the rights protected by the ratified conventions, which may be invoked before the courts that were bound to uphold them. 9. Regarding the overdue periodic reports to the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, those were currently being drafted and would be submitted to the bodies concerned before the end of 2014. 10. With regard to violence against women, Madagascar intended to devise a national action plan to combat such violence involving all stakeholders. Furthermore, measures had already been taken to establish a national office under the Ministry of Population to monitor gender-based violence. 11. Regarding women’s access to landownership and customary practices preventing women from inheriting land, awareness-raising workshops had been organized in the areas affected, such as the south-east. These efforts would be maintained and strengthened through the effective implementation of the landownership law in order to eliminate the de facto discrimination faced by women. 12. Regarding freedom of expression and the press, consultations had been held with all stakeholders since July 2014, at the initiative of the Ministry of Communication and with the support of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, with a view to finalizing the draft code of communication due to be submitted to the National Assembly in May 2015. This new code would take account of international standards aimed at ensuring that journalists could pursue their activities freely. 13. As for the practice of moletry, Madagascar stated that the Government would monitor and assess the implementation of the road map prohibiting moletry against minors. 14. In regard to the economic dependence of women and poverty, adding to information given in the report, Madagascar stated that with the support of UNDP the “Intensive functional literacy for development” approach had led in 2013 to the establishment of 18 literacy centres, which enabled recipients to acquire the reading, writing and arithmetic skills they required to manage their affairs and follow basic technical training courses. Some 150 resource persons had also been trained and deployed in local communities. 15. Regarding anti-human trafficking measures and the evaluation of their effectiveness, Madagascar indicated that the anti-trafficking bill adopted by the Government Council and the Council of Ministers would be put before Parliament. This bill provided for the criminal responsibility of legal persons involved in trafficking, including placement agencies engaging in trafficking. The evaluation of the effectiveness of anti-trafficking measures would be based, inter alia, on the numbers of alleged perpetrators of trafficking investigated, prosecuted, tried and convicted and the number of victims obtaining effective redress. 16. Concerning the fight against torture and ill-treatment, Madagascar stated that the bill criminalizing cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment had been submitted to the Government for referral to Parliament. The new laws against trafficking and the law on torture and ill-treatment would be incorporated into the Criminal Code so as to facilitate their effective implementation by law enforcement officials. The ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment was currently under consideration. 17. With regard to reducing the length of pretrial detention, Madagascar had adopted Act No. 2007-021 of 30 July 2007 reducing the duration of pretrial detention in order to avoid long detentions without due process. The following measures had been taken in that respect: prompt drafting of a bill on alternative measures to imprisonment and alternatives to detention, including community service; simplification of the parole process and quicker processing of cases. 18. Madagascar had achieved significant results in its reform of the prison system since 2013, thanks to the support of the European Union. Madagascar intended to reform its prison system according to the concept of the correction and rehabilitation of detainees through a reorganization of prison work and prison camps. 19. Regarding the reform of the judicial system, following two studies of the shortcomings of the criminal justice and anti-corruption systems, concrete proposals had been made by all stakeholders of the criminal justice system to develop a national action plan aimed at reforming the criminal justice and anti-corruption systems. 20. As for the promotion of equality between men and women, the bill ratifying the Southern African Development Community Protocol on Gender and Development adopted by the Government Council would shortly be submitted to the Council of Ministers. The ratification of the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa (the Maputo Protocol) would be considered subsequently. In an effort to promote the participation of women in decision-making in public affairs, the bill on the proportional representation and participation of men and women in elected or non-elected decision-making positions in the public sector had been submitted to the Government for referral to Parliament. 21. The bill reforming the Nationality Code before the Government Council and the Council of Ministers for referral to Parliament was aimed at eliminating discrimination against children born to Malagasy mothers who were married to foreign fathers without Malagasy nationality. 22. In respect of the implementation in practice of legislation protecting the rights of persons with disabilities, the State acknowledged that not enough facilities had been adapted to the needs of persons living with disabilities. However, a number of public and private buildings or spaces were provided with access to car parks, toilets and ramps. 23.  With regard to moving towards the Abuja objective and improving access to free health care for all, the Government would be taking the steps in due course. Free care was provided to victims of disasters, catastrophes and epidemics. 24.  With regard to the observance of human rights by companies, in accordance with the requirements of the United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, the Ministry of Justice had held a series of training sessions since 2012, with the support of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and in partnership with the mining companies Sherrit and QMM, for the benefit of their employees, law enforcement officials and representatives of civil society organizations. 25. Regarding investigations into cases of extrajudicial executions and collective punishments of cattle thieves allegedly perpetrated by the security forces, the latter had had no choice but to resort to the use of force in order to protect themselves as well as the lives of the defenseless population. However, certain individuals who had engaged in illegal acts had been subject to investigation. 26. With regard to the fight against corruption, the Ministry of Justice, the Independent Anti-Corruption Office and the Committee for the Safeguard of Integrity had signed an agreement on 29 August 2014 to update their 10-year joint action plan. The three signatories had pledged to implement the action plan and increase efforts to combat corruption. 27. Regarding the measures taken to combat child labour and provide assistance to street children, Madagascar indicated that, since March 2014 and with the support of the International Labour Organization (ILO), the National Commission to Combat Child Labour had conducted prevention, withdrawal and support activities for child victims of sexual exploitation for commercial purposes in several regions of Madagascar. These children’s parents will receive assistance to improve their living conditions. The Ministry of Tourism also adopted a Code of Conduct on 3 March 2014 to combat the sexual exploitation of children for commercial purposes covering 155 tourism operators, with the support of ILO and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). 28. Madagascar stated that following its incorporation into domestic law, the road map had become a State law applicable upon its entry into force. Under this law, the Malagasy Reconciliation Council had been established in January 2013. In order to succeed with national reconciliation, the Government had decided to send a delegation on a fact-finding mission in October 2014, with the support of UNDP, to study good practices in South Africa and Togo. The findings of this mission would be used to ensure the success of the country’s national reconciliation. The completion of the national reconciliation process would facilitate the full implementation of the road map. 29. With regard to the effective application of legislation on the illegal trade in rosewood, the Government had established an interministerial committee in June 2014 with responsibility for cleaning up the supply channels of rosewood and ebony wood and for proposing laws compatible with a human rights-based approach, particularly the right to a preserved environment and the right to sustainable development. The fight against such trafficking was conducted in partnership with international partners. 30. Madagascar stressed that the extreme poverty affecting 60 per cent of the population represented a major stumbling block which hindered the realization of economic, social and cultural rights. It also cited the lack of human and financial resources, widespread corruption and the persistence of harmful customary practices as other constraints. In accordance with its general State policy, Madagascar intended to restore the rule of law and good governance, strengthen respect for human rights, and combat corruption with a view to building an environment favourable to sustainable and inclusive development. 31. In its efforts to promote and protect all human rights, Madagascar called for the international community’s support in terms of capacity-building and technical assistance.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 32. During the interactive dialogue, 68 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 33. Ghana applauded the signature of the road map towards political cohesion and the successful organization of the presidential election by the Independent National Electoral Commission for the Transition and the Special Electoral Court. Ghana made recommendations. 34. Indonesia noted the establishment of a national human rights institution and the signature of international instruments, including the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW). It noted steps to combat trafficking in women and children, as well as related legislative reform and training. Indonesia made recommendations. 35. Ireland commended political progress and the standing invitation to special procedures, and urged the submission of overdue reports to treaty bodies. It expressed concern regarding freedom of expression, gender-based violence, marital rape and human trafficking. Ireland made recommendations. 36. Italy welcomed the steps taken towards the restoration of civil and political rights. It hoped that the new political environment would facilitate the fight against poverty and the protection of vulnerable population groups. Noting the ratification of several international instruments, it encouraged the ratification of others. Italy made recommendations. 37. Japan expressed concern regarding the deteriorating human rights situation. It noted peaceful presidential and parliamentary elections and the engagement with human rights mechanisms, notably the standing invitation to special procedures and the cooperation with OHCHR. Japan made recommendations. 38. Kuwait welcomed Madagascar’s efforts to raise awareness of human rights, and encouraged further progress in that regard, including dissemination of the texts of human rights instruments and the implementation thereof. Kuwait made a recommendation. 39. Libya commended the establishment of the Independent National Human Rights Commission and the National Child Protection Committee, as well as the reform of laws against trafficking in persons. Libya made a recommendation. 40. Malaysia welcomed the restoration of democracy, recent elections and adoption of a new constitution, and the commitment to combating corruption. It noted the provision of free primary education in Madagascar and the steps taken towards children’s re-enrolment in schools. Malaysia made recommendations. 41. Mali commended the cooperation with human rights procedures and mechanisms; the recent successful presidential elections; and the designation of the fight against torture and other forms of poor treatment as a national priority. Mali made recommendations. 42. Mauritania noted normative and legislative progress, including towards ratification of ICRMW and establishment of a national human rights institution. It recognized Madagascar’s commitment to civil and political rights and the need for international support. Mauritania made recommendations. 43. Mexico recognized the establishment of the Independent National Human Rights Commission, which should ensure inclusive dialogue with all sectors of the population. It commended the law authorizing ratification of ICRMW. Mexico made recommendations. 44. Montenegro noted the improved institutional and legislative framework and commended the standing invitation to special procedures. It asked about Madagascar’s intentions regarding the establishment of an official moratorium on the death penalty, and about steps towards combating discrimination against children. Montenegro made recommendations. 45. Morocco welcomed the establishment of national institutions, efforts to combat gender-based violence, and the criminalization of torture under the new Constitution. Welcoming prison reform, Morocco asked about alternatives to imprisonment and about the rehabilitation of detainees into society. 46. Mozambique applauded the establishment of a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles, and the steps taken towards ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (OP-CAT). The international community should provide technical assistance to Madagascar. Mozambique made a recommendation. 47. Namibia welcomed the criminalization of torture under the Constitution, and the establishment of a national human rights institution. It encouraged Madagascar to further protect women’s rights and to align domestic legislation with international instruments. Namibia made recommendations. 48. The Netherlands commended the recent parliamentary and presidential elections, which it hoped would facilitate the implementation of recommendations. It expressed concern regarding traditional practices that discriminated against women, particularly sexual exploitation and domestic violence. It made recommendations. 49. The Niger noted the establishment of a national human rights institution, the prison and judicial reform, the provision of free health care for women and for children under the age of five, and efforts to combat gender-based violence. The Niger made recommendations. 50. Nigeria commended the national policy against gender-based violence, which would help to end impunity for perpetrators. It urged Madagascar to improve detention conditions for prisoners, increase wages and resources for teachers and civil servants, and expedite the legal process. 51. Norway noted the efforts to restore law and order, the democratic elections, the establishment of democratic institutions, and the signature of the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (ICCPR-OP 2). It expressed concern about deteriorating conditions in the education sector and the degradation of rainforests. Norway made recommendations. 52. The Philippines welcomed legislative reforms and the establishment of a national human rights institution. It noted progress towards the ratification of ICRMW, and urged protection of women’s and children’s rights and universal access to education. It made recommendations. 53. Portugal welcomed Madagascar’s standing invitation to special procedures, signature of ICCPR-OP 2, and creation of the Independent National Human Rights Commission. It asked for information regarding increasing violations of children’s rights. Portugal made recommendations. 54. The Russian Federation welcomed the successful presidential elections and the establishment of the government and parliament, concluding the transitional period. It noted positive efforts towards social and economic development, and to improve democracy. It made recommendations. 55. Rwanda commended the steps taken to alleviate poverty, promote gender equality, combat gender-based violence, and combat trafficking in persons, especially children; as well as Madagascar’s signature of ICCPR-OP 2. Rwanda made recommendations. 56. Senegal noted the challenges relating to the eradication of poverty, to the promotion of education and to the enjoyment of some fundamental rights. It noted that Madagascar deserved the support of the international community to improve the human rights situation. Senegal made recommendations. 57. Sierra Leone commended the efforts to restore democracy and provide education and health care. It encouraged Madagascar to end child labour, prosecute all acts of torture, combat trafficking, and promote gender equality and public-sector participation. It made recommendations. 58. Singapore noted the establishment of a unity government and the steps towards national reconciliation. It commended measures to facilitate the re-enrolment of children in school, and to combat gender-based violence. Singapore made recommendations. 59. Slovenia commended the signature of ICCPR-OP 2 and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure. It welcomed efforts towards the inclusion of gender-based violence in the Criminal Code. It expressed concern regarding poor access to clean drinking water and to sanitation. Slovenia made recommendations. 60. South Africa welcomed efforts towards ensuring food security and the right to health, and the implementation of social infrastructure and projects. It encouraged the international community to support Madagascar in its development. It made recommendations. 61. South Sudan commended democratic reform in Madagascar. It noted that despite measures to eradicate poverty, it was increasing, and that further efforts were required. It noted the establishment of a national human rights institution and of measures against human trafficking. It made a recommendation. 62. Spain commended Madagascar’s commitment to human rights, implementation of recommendations made during the first UPR cycle, signature of ICCPR-OP 2, and measures to strengthen education. It expressed concern regarding domestic violence. Spain made recommendations. 63. The Sudan noted the adoption of the Constitution, steps to protect women’s and children’s health, and establishment of the National Child Protection Committee. It also noted the 2013–2015 interim plan for education, to improve access to education. The Sudan made recommendations. 64. Switzerland commended political reform, but expressed concern regarding prison conditions, allegations of torture, and impunity, and also regarding traditional practices that discriminated against women, including moletry, forced marriage, and the non-recognition of marital rape as a crime. Switzerland made recommendations. 65. Thailand welcomed the establishment of a national human rights institution and the legislative precedence of ratified international agreements. Efforts to eradicate poverty and unemployment should be a priority. It welcomed progress in improving health and education. Thailand made recommendations. 66. Togo commended the recent free elections, noting efforts to restore the rule of law and to combat corruption. It noted the establishment of a national human rights institution and of measures to protect vulnerable women and children. Togo made recommendations. 67. Madagascar stated that the process of ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty, had already begun and would shortly be adopted by the Government prior to being submitted to Parliament. 68. Regarding the situation of twin children, Madagascar indicated that, whereas twins had previously not been allowed to stay in their villages, being forced to grow up in other districts or regions, nowadays some progress had been made, thanks to UNDP support. Twins were now accepted in villages and even took part in celebrations of international human rights’ days. Moreover, a centre had been built with UNDP support for parents who agreed to raise their twins within the family. 69. In terms of detention conditions, Madagascar acknowledged that it had experienced difficulties, primarily owing to the political crisis, but indicated that efforts had been made to reduce the rate of mortality and malnutrition in prisons. Regarding the reported cases of torture, Madagascar said that administrative investigations had been undertaken. It also indicated that it had worked closely with international organizations, in particular the International Committee of the Red Cross and non-governmental organizations, which kept it informed of any irregularities occurring in prisons. Steps had also been taken to improve the facilities, food and security in prisons. 70. Tunisia welcomed the new Constitution, road map, national human rights institution compliant with the Paris Principles, and standing invitation to special procedures. It encouraged efforts regarding the elimination of violence against women and children. Tunisia made recommendations. 71. Turkey commended the elections, adoption of the new Constitution, standing invitation to special procedures, and establishment of a national human rights institution. It encouraged efforts regarding education and noted civil registration challenges. Turkey made recommendations. 72. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland welcomed progress on the subject of trafficking and on measures against corruption. It noted a failure to ratify regional instruments and urged efforts to combat corruption and gender-based violence. It made recommendations. 73. The United Republic of Tanzania commended the unity Government and the Independent National Electoral Commission, and urged political parties to fulfil pledges under the road map. It urged OHCHR to provide support. It made recommendations. 74. The United States of America welcomed the democratic election and commitments to a representative government. It expressed concern regarding corruption, abuses by security forces, and discrimination against women under the Nationality Code. It made recommendations. 75. Uruguay welcomed the commitment to re-establishing the rule of law; efforts regarding education, corruption, and vulnerable women and children; and the constitutional measures against torture and ill-treatment. It expressed concern regarding poverty figures. Uruguay made recommendations. 76. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela noted progress regarding Act No. 2011-014, which had included a road map for the new legislative framework; the Independent National Human Rights Commission; and measures to protect women and children. It made recommendations. 77. Viet Nam welcomed the efforts to implement recommendations accepted during the first UPR cycle. It noted achievements regarding human rights, particularly women’s and children’s rights, in the face of economic difficulties. It made recommendations. 78. Algeria commended reforms, the ratification of ICRMW, and efforts regarding poverty, and women’s and children’s rights. It urged further efforts against human trafficking and sex tourism, and called upon the international community for support. Algeria made recommendations. 79. Angola recognized the efforts made in support of children’s rights and the rights of disabled persons. It commended measures to protect vulnerable women and children, the bill amending the Nationality Code, and literacy initiatives. Angola made recommendations. 80. Argentina commended the elections and the adoption of the new Constitution. It expressed concern regarding discrimination against women and encouraged harmonization of domestic legislation with the international treaties ratified. Argentina made recommendations. 81. Armenia expressed concern regarding a failure to ratify international instruments and regarding poor school enrolment. It welcomed efforts in connection with literacy, education for children with disabilities, and gender equality in schools. Armenia made recommendations. 82. Australia welcomed progress with regard to elections and capital punishment. It expressed concern regarding child prostitution, sex tourism, human trafficking, gender-based violence, and the detention of the former President. It urged action on education. Australia made recommendations. 83. Bangladesh commended the efforts made, despite many challenges. It welcomed the peaceful 2013 elections and political reform, noting that the new Constitution upheld women’s rights. It commended the progress made towards ratification of ICRMW and encouraged further international cooperation. 84. Belgium acknowledged the answers provided to the questions submitted in advance. It welcomed the creation of the Independent National Human Rights Commission and asked for additional information regarding the implementation of the land ownership law. Belgium made recommendations. 85. Botswana applauded Madagascar’s progress regarding democracy and the rule of law, and its constitutional and normative measures to protect human rights. It expressed concern regarding reports of human trafficking, of detention without trial and of poor detention conditions. Botswana made recommendations. 86. Brazil welcomed the adoption of the new Constitution, signature of ICRMW, and establishment of national commissions to protect children and promote human rights. However, it acknowledged remaining challenges regarding political reconciliation and participation. Brazil made recommendations. 87. Burkina Faso commended progress with regard to elections, and governmental and constitutional reform. It welcomed the progress made towards ratification of ICRMW, the creation of a national human rights institution, and the promotion of women’s and children’s rights, and encouraged judicial reform. 88. Burundi welcomed the 2013 elections, the institutional, administrative and legislative reforms, and the measures regarding human rights education. It commended the establishment of the Independent National Human Rights Commission and the National Inclusive Finance Strategy, and encouraged further progress. 89. Canada asked how the establishment of the Independent National Human Rights Commission would contribute to a more effective and less politicized human rights protection system. It welcomed progress made, notably the peaceful elections in 2013. Canada made recommendations. 90. The Central African Republic welcomed the successful elections; legislative measures regarding primary education, sex tourism and commercial exploitation of children; and measures against gender-based violence. It called on the international community for support. It made recommendations. 91. Chad noted progress made since the first UPR cycle, including the creation of a national human rights institution, measures regarding economic, social and cultural rights, and efforts to protect women and children. Chad made a recommendation. 92. China appreciated institutional improvements and measures regarding domestic violence, trafficking in persons, prison conditions, human rights education, and the protection of vulnerable groups. It welcomed Madagascar’s cooperation with OHCHR, and with the treaty bodies and special procedures. China made a recommendation. 93. The Congo welcomed the progress regarding ICRMW, a national human rights institution, the National Child Protection Committee, and the reform of trafficking legislation. It encouraged the implementation of recommendations from the first UPR cycle, calling for international assistance. 94. Costa Rica noted the measures taken to guarantee universal access to education, as well as the human rights education activities for public officials. It noted the de facto moratorium on the death penalty, and the signature of ICCPR-OP 2. It made recommendations. 95. Côte d’Ivoire noted reforms to align national policies with international standards, and welcomed the democratic elections held. It encouraged efforts regarding international mechanisms, domestic violence, sexual exploitation, and the rights of vulnerable groups. It made recommendations. 96. Cuba noted Madagascar’s commitment to the UPR process, and collaboration with OHCHR. It highlighted judicial reform, progress in civil and political rights, and efforts to combat poverty, which were lent greater urgency by the crisis. Cuba made recommendations. 97. The Democratic Republic of the Congo commended the progress made in spite of recent difficulties, particularly with regard to the rights of women and children. Additionally, institutional reforms would improve fundamental freedoms, and subsequently prison conditions. It made recommendations. 98. Djibouti was pleased to note the adoption of a new constitution, which would re-establish and strengthen human rights in Madagascar. It called on the international community to support Madagascar in its objectives. Djibouti made recommendations. 99. Egypt commended the comprehensive national dialogue, which would ultimately lead to lasting democracy, the establishment of a national human rights institution, and the measures to empower women, protect women’s and children’s health, and improve access to health care. Egypt made recommendations. 100. Ethiopia noted the establishment of the Independent National Human Rights Commission, and commended the restoration of democracy. It welcomed Madagascar’s efforts to combat trafficking and sexual exploitation, and its support for women and children. Ethiopia made recommendations. 101. France encouraged further efforts towards improving human rights. It asked about the status of the draft law against human trafficking and any related measures, and about whether prison reform was planned. France made recommendations. 102. Gabon welcomed Madagascar’s cooperation with international human rights mechanisms, and the steps taken to protect women’s and children’s health and to ensure vaccine coverage. It urged the international community to support Madagascar’s efforts. Gabon made recommendations. 103. Germany expressed concern regarding the human rights situation in Madagascar, and urged the country to accelerate its efforts to improve the implementation of recommendations made under the first UPR cycle. Germany made recommendations. 104. Regarding the situation of former President Marc Ravalomanana, Madagascar stated that the road map had provided for his unconditional, though suitably prepared return. However, Marc Ravalomanana had returned without warning, a move that had also been condemned by the international community, and he had conducted subversive activities calling for insurrection, which had increased the risk of a new crisis at a time when the country needed stability for its recovery. There was a danger that all the progress achieved so far might be lost. The decision was therefore taken to place him under house arrest in order to preserve public order. 105. Regarding the Independent National Human Rights Commission, the new law had introduced significant changes. Members of the Commission had previously been appointed by the executive. Under the new legislation, this task was performed by legally designated bodies. According to the law, which complied with the requirements of the Paris Principles, members of the Commission were barred from belonging to any political party. 106. Madagascar stressed that the fight against corruption was a priority of the Government’s general policy. A programme to review the action plan to combat corruption had been launched to implement this general policy at the sectoral level. The review was based on the results of the previous programme and took into account all stakeholders that supported Madagascar in its fight against corruption. 107. In conclusion, Madagascar expressed its sincere appreciation to all the States which had taken part in the interactive dialogue in a constructive and cooperative spirit. Madagascar expressed the hope that its comments had provided some clarification of the way in which the human rights situation had evolved in the country since the submission of its initial report in 2010. The delegation stressed that its Government took note of all the observations and recommendations made by each State and would consider them very carefully. Madagascar would provide written replies to any questions that had remained unanswered due to lack of time. Madagascar was aware of the difficulties that prevented the full realization of all human rights in the country. The President of the Republic and the Government were determined to continue promoting, strengthening and maintaining the rule of law in the interests of social justice and the sustainable and inclusive development of the country’s population. Lastly, Madagascar reiterated its calls for the international community’s support for its efforts to improve the human rights situation.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**  ** The conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 108. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue and listed below have been examined by Madagascar and enjoy its support: 108.1 Take the necessary steps to ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families (ICRMW), the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (OP-CEDAW) and the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (OP-CAT) (Ghana); 108.2 Consider timely ratification of the major international human rights instruments, including the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (ICPPED) and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) (Japan); 108.3 Ratify the Optional Protocol to CAT (Mali); 108.4 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (ICCPR-OP 2) (Montenegro); 108.5 Ratify the Optional Protocol to CEDAW (Netherlands); 108.6 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR as a matter of priority (Norway); 108.7 Ratify the Optional Protocol of 1999 to CEDAW (Norway); 108.8 Accelerate efforts to accede to the ICRMW, and provide the Council with an update on its implementation at the next UPR reporting cycle (Philippines); 108.9 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Portugal); 108.10 Ratify the Optional Protocol to CEDAW (Portugal); 108.11 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (OP-ICESCR), the Optional Protocol to CAT; and the ICPPED (Portugal); 108.12 Consider ratifying the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Rwanda); 108.13 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Rwanda); 108.14 Ratify all the International Conventions it has signed, as well as the ICPPED and the Optional Protocol to CEDAW (Sierra Leone); 108.15 Ratify the CRPD and its Optional Protocol (South Africa); 108.16 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the ICESCR, and also accept the enquiry mechanism and communication between States (Spain); 108.17 Promptly ratify and implement the Optional Protocol to CAT (Switzerland); 108.18 Promptly ratify and implement the Optional Protocol to CEDAW (Switzerland); 108.19 Ratify the Optional Protocol to CAT (Togo); 108.20 Ratify the CRPD, the ICPPED and the Optional Protocol to CAT (Tunisia); 108.21 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR with a view to abolishing the death penalty (Turkey); 108.22 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights with a view to abolishing the death penalty (Uruguay); 108.23 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment (Uruguay); 108.24 Ratify without reservations the Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of the International Criminal Court (Uruguay); 108.25 Ratify without reservations the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Uruguay); 108.26 Ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol (Uruguay); 108.27 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Argentina); 108.28 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, and adopt measures to eliminate discriminatory practices (Argentina); 108.29 Accede to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Armenia); 108.30 Continue to promote and protect the rights of vulnerable groups, especially through the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Brazil); 108.31 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Central African Republic); 108.32 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to eliminate the death penalty in national legislation (Costa Rica); 108.33 Ratify international instruments signed by Madagascar, particularly the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance; and transpose its provisions to national legislation (France); 108.34 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights with the view to abolishing the death penalty, signed in 2012; and also amend national criminal legislation on that basis as currently under discussion in the National Assembly (France); 108.35 Consider ratification of the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights with the view to abolishing the death penalty, as signed in 2012 (Gabon); 108.36 Consider ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, signed in 2007 (Gabon); 108.37 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and take effective legal and practical steps to combat gender-based violence, stereotypes and promote gender equality (Germany); 108.38 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and ensure that all officials strictly observe the detention regulations defined by Malagasy law as well as the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, in accordance with international human rights standards (Germany); 108.39 Take appropriate measures to ensure that obligations under the ICRMW are incorporated into domestic laws (Indonesia); 108.40 Bring national legislation into line with the international instruments it has ratified (Senegal); 108.41 Work on the establishment of an institution concerned with the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Libya); 108.42 Proceed with the accreditation of the NHRI with an A status in accordance with the Paris Principles (Portugal); 108.43 Continue its efforts to bring the NHRI in line with the Paris Principles (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 108.44 Give enough resources for the good operation of the National Commission on Human Rights (Belgium); 108.45 Pursue cooperation with UNDP to lay foundations for human rights and learn from experience (Kuwait); 108.46 Endeavour to implement the remaining recommendations of the previous and present UPR review (Mozambique); 108.47 Consider developing Human Rights Indicators as suggested by the OHCHR as an instrument that allows for a more precise and coherent evaluation of national human rights policies (Portugal); 108.48 Continue its efforts to empower women through its work with UNDP which will enable women to become financially independent and improve their managerial skills and productivity (Singapore); 108.49 Increase public awareness of human rights (Sudan); 108.50 Consider the elaboration of a national policy for the child, which encompasses health, culture and sports (Turkey); 108.51 Pursue social and economic development programmes to promote economic and social rights for the population (Viet Nam); 108.52 Give priority to implementing recommendations connected to economic, social and cultural rights, whose implementation was delayed because of the political crisis (Angola); 108.53 Continue to respect the terms of the SADC roadmap and that political leaders work together towards reconciliation (Australia); 108.54 Continue its efforts on reducing the unemployment rate, eliminating poverty and emphasizing the protection and promotion of people’s economic, social and cultural rights (China); 108.55 Incorporate human rights into the curriculum (Djibouti); 108.56 Promote efforts aimed at implementing the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Egypt); 108.57 Intensify its cooperation with the treaty bodies (Niger); 108.58 Take steps to eliminate traditional cultural practices that discriminate against women (Ghana); 108.59 Make further progress with the domestic implementation of international conventions it has ratified and adopt stringent measures, including legislation and awareness-raising campaigns, with a view to eliminating traditional and cultural practices that discriminate against women and girls (Netherlands); 108.60 Step up its efforts to ensure that legislation combating gender-based discrimination is effectively implemented and that effective measures are adopted to strengthen gender equality (Spain); 108.61 Continue its efforts to adopt legislations to combat trafficking and protect women’s rights in particular nationality and gender equality (Sudan); 108.62 Step up efforts to improve the civil registration service so that all children will be registered at birth (Turkey); 108.63 Reform its nationality law to ensure that all citizens have equal right to confer nationality to their children and the children born to citizen mothers are no longer at risk of statelessness (United States of America); 108.64 Step up efforts to stop discrimination against twins (Angola); 108.65 Take a policy in order to guarantee effective application of the law on real estate ownership and overcome the customs which make it impossible for women to inherit land (Belgium); 108.66 Step up efforts directed at fighting discrimination based on gender, particularly in order to end discriminatory treatment affecting children born to a foreign father married to a Malagasy women (Brazil); 108.67 Institute a framework for combating gender-based violence and punishing perpetrators (Ghana); 108.68 Continue efforts to combat trafficking of women and children, including the establishment of a national plan of action to combat trafficking (Indonesia); 108.69 Adopt a national plan of action to combat sexual and gender-based violence, criminalize marital rape as a matter of urgency and strengthen laws and their implementation on trafficking in persons (Ireland); 108.70 Adopt further measures to prevent and contrast those practices — such as early and forced marriages, and moletry — which have a negative impact on the empowerment of women (Italy); 108.71 Approve — as a matter of priority — a bill punishing marital rape as an offence, and develop a national policy that may include an operative plan and indicators, aimed at implementing the legislation on gender-related violence (Italy); 108.72 Take into positive consideration the abolition of the death penalty, or at least the adoption of a de jure moratorium on executions (Italy); 108.73 Step up measures taken at the national level to effectively combat violence against women (Mali); 108.74 Establish public policies to raise awareness for the elimination of cultural practices that are contrary to the rights of women, including premarital contracts determined by a donation (Mexico); 108.75 Reinforce the National Committee for the Protection of the Child to enhance its ability to protect the rights of the child, especially street children (Mexico); 108.76 Consider the enactment of the moratorium on the death penalty under its domestic law (Namibia); 108.77 Make the implementation of anti-trafficking programmes, particularly the intensification of preventive measures and the protection of trafficking victims, a priority (Philippines); 108.78 Adopt the necessary measures to address the issues of sexual exploitation of children and traditional practices of violence against children such as the abandonment of twins, as a matter of priority, including at the level of accountability (Portugal); 108.79 Adopt a National Plan on the Security Council Resolution on Women, Peace and Security (1325) (Portugal); 108.80 Step up measures to combat trafficking in persons and sex tourism, including through rapid creation within the Government of a special body to deal with these issues (Russian Federation); 108.81 Adopt additional measures to eliminate violence against women and children and ensure gender equality in society (Russian Federation); 108.82 In collaboration with the international community, intensify efforts to combat trafficking of persons, particularly children (Rwanda); 108.83 Intensify efforts to ensure gender equality and eliminate sexual and gender-based violence, including through considering development of a National Action Plan and implementation of Security Council Resolution 1325 (Rwanda); 108.84 Step up measures and actions to benefit vulnerable women and children by encouraging their access to credit, health and education (Senegal); 108.85 Establish a moratorium on the death penalty, with a view to its elimination (Sierra Leone); 108.86 Advance policies for the participation of girls beyond the primary school level and promote strategies and actions to eliminate child early and forced marriage, including moletry (Sierra Leone); 108.87 Strengthen its efforts in making all forms of sexual violence against women and girls, including marital rape, criminal offences (Slovenia); 108.88 Combat violence against women and children, by implementing existing legislation and adopting comprehensive measures to address all forms of domestic violence (South Africa); 108.89 Establish a programme to effectively abolish the death penalty in its criminal law (Spain); 108.90 Strengthen the legal framework to combat and eradicate the worst forms of child labour, through legislative measures and awareness-raising campaigns (Spain); 108.91 Take the necessary measures in order to improve conditions of detention (Switzerland); 108.92 Adopt a moratorium on the death penalty with a view to its abolition (Togo); 108.93 Fight effectively gender-based violence and traditional practices which are discriminating against women (Togo); 108.94 Strengthen efforts to tackle gender-based violence by introducing specific measures to encourage more reporting by the public; increased transparency; and increased investigations, prosecutions, convictions and sentences, to deter offenders (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 108.95 Strengthen legislative measures and establish measures to combat discrimination and violence against women; bring to an end damaging cultural practices harmful to girls and to twins (Viet Nam); 108.96 Pursue efforts to combat sexual exploitation of children (Algeria); 108.97 Strengthen efforts to protect its most vulnerable populations, in accordance with obligations under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and under the Convention on the Rights of the Child; and adopt specific legislation and programmes targeting gender-based violence, including marital rape (Australia); 108.98 Establish a formal moratorium on the death penalty with a view to ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR (Australia); 108.99 Strengthen existing legislation on sexual exploitation and human trafficking, and ensure its full implementation (Botswana); 108.100 Take specific measures to eliminate child marriage, early marriage and forced marriage, which remain widespread in a number of communities. These measures require new constitutional and legislative protection as well as commitments in terms of education and health for girls, and the protection against violence, as well as child protection services which must take account of the gender dimension and economic empowerment of women (Canada); 108.101 Step up legal protection to Malagasy women to protect against violence, including by making marital rape a criminal offence (Canada); 108.102 Identify the root causes of trafficking in persons and sexual exploitation of children in order to provide appropriate solutions (Central African Republic); 108.103 Strengthen measures to protect women and children against harmful cultural practices such as moletry and stigmatization of twins (Chad); 108.104 Develop a national plan to combat gender violence and allow effective implementation of the national and international legal framework; that also involves training of persons employed in the justice system (Costa Rica); 108.105 Continue and strengthen its fight against harmful traditional practices (Côte d’Ivoire); 108.106 Review the customary practices which are extensive and contrary to the efforts made to improve the situation of women, particularly the tradition of pre-engagement with minor girls (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 108.107 Seek to overcome obstacles that hinder the implementation of the act on trafficking, and expedite the current process of setting up a standing mechanism to combat trafficking (Egypt); 108.108 Maintain efforts aimed at combating various forms of violence against women (Egypt); 108.109 Further intensify efforts to combat harmful traditional practices affecting children (Ethiopia); 108.110 Take concrete measures to eliminate discriminatory practices against women; and to combat domestic violence (France); 108.111 Develop child protection policies particularly in terms of combating sexual exploitation and child labour (France); 108.112 Review national legislation on the basis of current international standards in order to effectively criminalize acts of torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment (France); 108.113 Abolish the death penalty and in the meantime, introduce a moratorium on the death penalty as quickly as possible and sign and ratify the 2nd Optional Protocol to the ICCPR (Germany); 108.114 Ensure that the new ten-year plan between the Ministry of Justice and the Anti-Corruption Office fully addresses corruption practices in all branches of the judiciary, civil service and armed forces (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 108.115 Undertake a comprehensive reform of the judicial system, including the establishment of a credible system of accountability for security force abuses (United States of America); 108.116 Follow through on recommendations articulated in the recent assessment of anti-corruption efforts undertaken by the Ministry of Justice and United Nations Development Programme, including ensuring the physical safety of anti-corruption officials and whistleblowers and encouraging civil society participation in the judicial reform process (United States of America); 108.117 Continue efforts in the field of judicial and penitentiary reforms (Algeria); 108.118 Ensure compliance with the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners and guarantee all detainees access to a fair and equitable trial within a reasonable time frame (Botswana); 108.119 Conduct a human rights education campaign among the law enforcement officials, to ensure permanent democratic freedoms in political life and in the work of the security forces; not just during electoral periods (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 108.120 Continue to increase the empowerment of women in the national institutions (South Sudan); 108.121 Strengthen efforts on the implementation of its national poverty strategy (South Africa); 108.122 Continue to intensify its efforts to combating poverty (United Republic of Tanzania); 108.123 Pursue the fight against poverty and to take policies which favour vulnerable people, and pursue economic cooperation which the country needs (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 108.124 Make efforts to reduce the poverty rate (Angola); 108.125 Continue efforts to combat poverty (Cuba); 108.126 Combat the precarious situation of labour and poverty (Djibouti); 108.127 Redouble its efforts in providing free primary education for its citizens with a view to encouraging children who have been affected by the political crisis to attend primary school (Malaysia); 108.128 Intensify its awareness and campaign programmes to encourage school enrolment of children who have been excluded from the education system (Malaysia); 108.129 Continue adopting measures like the Temporary Plan for Education 2013–2015 guaranteeing education free of charges (Mexico); 108.130 Continue to maintain efforts towards ensuring free primary education for all Madagascan children and promote the right of the girl child to education (Namibia); 108.131 Continue work in order to ensure universal free primary education and broadened access to education and health care (Russian Federation); 108.132 Continue working with UNICEF and other relevant partners to encourage school enrolment for children to maximize the potential of Madagascar’s next generation (Singapore); 108.133 Enhance its efforts to raise school attendance rates, especially among girls, and reduce the drop-out rate (Thailand); 108.134 Take the necessary measures towards a primary education fully free of charge (Turkey); 108.135 Ensure that primary education is entirely free, given the high number of children who do not attend school (Angola); 108.136 Ensure the access to education, including to primary education, particularly for the most vulnerable children (Armenia); 108.137 Promote broader access to education for all children (Côte d’Ivoire); 108.138 Take all necessary measures to achieve the objective of free primary education (Cuba); 108.139 Apply broadly the principles of governance set out in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as they are key to the sustainable management of natural resources, such as protection of rainforests, and essential to the realization of fundamental economic, social and cultural rights, as recommended previously (Norway). 109. The following recommendations will be examined by Madagascar which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-eighth session of the Human Rights Council in March 2015: 109.1 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Montenegro); 109.2 Ratify the international human rights legal instruments to which Madagascar is not a party (Niger); 109.3 Further intensify efforts to ensure equitable access to health and education to all (Ethiopia); 109.4 Take urgent measures as necessary to overcome prison overcrowding (Central African Republic); 109.5 Decriminalize defamation, abolish insult laws and take all additional measures to ensure, in law and in practice, a safe and enabling environment for journalists (Ireland); 109.6 Take concrete steps to protect and promote freedom of expression and press freedom as outlined in the road map for ending the crisis (Japan); 109.7 Have a regular dialogue with human rights defenders on an equal footing with them (Switzerland); 109.8 Step up its efforts in order to provide a safe environment for journalists, human rights defenders and other civil society actors (Tunisia); 109.9 Remove the restrictions on the capacity of journalists to freely criticize the Government without fearing reprisals by updating the law on communication of 1990, and the Special Commission on Audio-Visual Communication (Canada); 109.10 Take all the necessary measures, including material assistance and support programmes to families, to ensure that all persons, especially children, have an adequate standard of living, including access to clean drinking water and sanitation (Slovenia); 109.11 Provide greater resources to ensure universal access to drinking water and sanitation, particularly in rural areas (Spain); 109.12 Increase investments in its health system to ensure universal access to essential and affordable health services (Thailand); 109.13 Progressively realize the right to health to the maximum of its available resources by ensuring the equal and non-discriminatory access of all persons, including women and children to quality and low-cost community health care and the respect of this right by everybody; including “traditional leaders” and other stakeholders (Germany); 109.14 Raise the age of completion of compulsory schooling, with a view to properly address the issue of child labour, and ensure that primary education is free of charge for everyone (Italy); 109.15 Step up social measures to deal with children who are not attending school and promote their rights (Mauritania); 109.16 Take appropriate measures to ensure that primary education is totally free of charges (Mauritania); 109.17 Implement the National Development Plan including the revised Sector Plan for Education that has budget allocations ensuring priority to free and qualitative education for all (Norway); 109.18 Continue reinforcing its efforts by supporting the most vulnerable and less privileged children to complete their studies (United Republic of Tanzania); 109.19 Allocate sufficient budget to the educational system so that all children, particularly the most vulnerable, have access to education (Costa Rica); 109.20 Address the marginalization suffered by persons with disabilities in society, especially children and girls as regards employment, education, and the basic right of access to public buildings (Ghana); 109.21 Implement a national strategy on the rights of persons with disabilities (South Africa). 110. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English/French only]   Composition of the delegation  The delegation of Madagascar was headed by H.E. Ms. Noeline RAMANANTENASOA, Garde des sceaux, Ministre de la Justice, and composed of the following members: • Monsieur Honoré Parfait RAZAFINJATOVO, Directeur Général des Programmes et des Ressources, Ministère de la Justice; • Monsieur Solofo RAZAFITRIMO, Chargé d’affaires a.i., Mission Permanente de Madagascar à Genève; • Monsieur Lucien RAKOTONIAINA, Directeur des Droits Humains et des Relations Internationales, Ministère de la Justice; • Monsieur M. Tsakorien Jaona Adolphe PILAZA, Directeur de la promotion du genre, Ministère de la Population, de la Protection sociale et de la Promotion de la Femme; • Madame Fanja RAJOELISON, Chef du Service à l’appui de la promotion et de la protection des droits de l’homme, Ministère de la Justice; • Madame Henintsoa ANDRIAMIARISOA, Chef du Service des Affaires Juridiques et des Droits de l’Homme, Ministère des Affaires étrangères; • Docteur Louisette RAHANTANIRINA, Point Focal des droits de l’homme, Ministère de la Santé; • Madame Harifera RABEMANANJARA, Conseiller, Mission Permanente de Madagascar à Genève; • Madame Mialy RAMILISON, Conseiller, Mission Permanente de Madagascar à Genève.     