Distr.: General 26 December 2013 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-fifth session Agenda item 6  Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Mauritius * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.13-19169 *1319169* 
Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–127 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–32 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 33–127 6 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 128–130 15  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 25 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its seventeenth session from 21 October to 1 November 2013. The review of Mauritius was held at the 6th meeting on 23 October 2013. The delegation of Mauritius was headed by Arvin Boolell, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade. At its 10th meeting held on 25 October 2013, the Working Group adopted the report on Mauritius.  2. On 14 January 2013, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Mauritius: Austria, Botswana and Qatar. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Mauritius: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/17/MUS/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/17/MUS/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/17/MUS/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, Slovenia and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Mauritius through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR). I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The head of the delegation introduced the national report of Mauritius. 6. Mauritius reaffirmed its commitment and continued support to the work of the Human Rights Council and the UPR mechanism. It recalled that in July of this year, the Government of Mauritius, OHCHR and the Human Rights Council had co-hosted a seminar in Mauritius for least developed countries and small island developing States to prepare them for the second cycle of the UPR. 7. Mauritius provided information on the actions taken to implement the recommendations that it accepted during the first review. It noted that its mid-term progress report, submitted in 2011, and its 2013 national report contain comprehensive information on such actions. Mauritius highlighted numerous steps taken to consult the public in the preparation of its national report, including information made available through the media, awareness campaigns and collaboration with non-governmental organizations (NGOs).  8. It stated that the Government had launched, in October 2012, the National Human Rights Action Plan for the period 2012–2020. This Plan embodies all commitments taken by Mauritius to improve the human rights situation in line with international best practices. A Human Rights Monitoring Committee was also established, comprising representatives of relevant ministries and departments, national human rights institutions as well as NGOs, to ensure the implementation of the plan. 9. Mauritius indicated that the Human Rights Action Plan advocates a number of measures, including strengthening international cooperation on human rights through ratification of human rights instruments; domestication of human rights treaties; greater realization of economic, social and cultural rights; strengthening women’s rights in the context of equal opportunities; better protection and safeguarding of the rights of vulnerable persons. 10. Additionally, a database of human rights indicators to monitor progress in the implementation of the recommendations of the Action Plan is in the process of being finalized with the assistance of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the University of Mauritius. 11. Mauritius noted that in 2012, the Protection of Human Rights (Amendment) Act, the Police Complaints Act and the National Preventive Mechanism Act were passed so as to broaden the mandate and functions of the National Human Rights Commission in line with international best practices. It provided details in this regard.  12. It was highlighted that the National Preventive Mechanism Division of the National Human Rights Commission gives effect to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (OP-CAT). It is responsible for visiting places of detention in order to ensure that persons deprived of liberty are protected against torture and inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and is also mandated to investigate complaints made by detainees and make recommendations on the treatment of persons in custody. 13. Mauritius also indicated that in 2012, the Equal Opportunities Act was enacted to provide better protection against all forms of discrimination. This Act aims at eliminating direct or indirect discrimination on the basis of age, caste, creed, ethnic origin, impairment, marital status, place of origin, political opinion, race, sex or sexual orientation. 14. As regards political representation of women, Mauritius highlighted that the Local Government Act, which was passed in 2011, stipulates that any group presenting more than two candidates in an electoral ward during municipal and village council elections shall ensure that the candidates are not of the same sex. The Constitution was also amended in this regard. As a result, there has been a significant increase in the number of women standing as candidates. and elected in recent elections. 15. On the question of domestic violence, Mauritius stated that the Government was aware of the need to address the issue in all its forms, and that it was endeavouring to curb gender-based violence by 2015. It provided detailed information on a number of initiatives adopted, including a National Action Plan to Combat Domestic Violence launched in 2011, the undertaking of a series of awareness programmes and special programmes aimed at young people. 16. On the rights of the disabled, Mauritius recalled that it had ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) in 2010 and submitted its report to the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities last year. Various measures adopted to ensure that disabled persons are not deprived of their rights were outlined.  17. Mauritius noted that it had made a reservation on article 11 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which deals with situations of risks and humanitarian emergencies, and explained that measures to include the needs and concerns of persons with disabilities in such situations are being addressed. It added that the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Bill currently being prepared includes provisions for the disabled. Once the law is passed, the Government will withdraw the reservation. 18. Regarding the reservation to article 24, paragraph 2 (b) on education, Mauritius indicated that it has engaged in a policy of inclusive education and expects to withdraw the reservation as soon as this policy is fully implemented. As for the reservation to article 9, paragraph 2 (d), which requires the State “to provide in buildings and other facilities open to the public signage in Braille”, Mauritius explained that the reservation had been made in view of the costs involved and that the Government proposes to withdraw the reservation in due course. 19. Mauritius then stated that it is committed to the protection of children from any form of abuse and exploitation and that a National Child Protection Strategy has been initiated in this regard.  20. It also highlighted that the Government was in the process of finalizing a Children’s Bill which would be introduced in the National Assembly shortly. Furthermore, Mauritius noted that it had invited the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography to visit Mauritius; ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (OP-CRC-SC) in 2011 and signed the Optional Protocol on a communications procedure (OP-CRC-IC) in 2012. 21. Mauritius stated that educating the population on human rights at all levels and nurturing a culture of human rights remains a priority. It noted that the Government has approached the United Nations for technical assistance in this regard. Detailed information regarding initiatives taken to promote a culture of human rights was provided. 22. The delegation indicated that the Ministry of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment has been set up with a view to eradicating absolute poverty and combating social exclusion. Moreover, the National Empowerment Foundation which falls under this Ministry is already implementing a number of programmes in this regard. 23. With regard to the elderly, Mauritius referred to the Government policy “Moving the Nation Forward: pleasant and active retirement for our elderly”. It also highlighted a number of projects and programmes launched over the past years in this connection. 24. On HIV/AIDS, Mauritius noted that the National AIDS Secretariat has formulated a National Strategic Framework 2013–2016, following wide consultations with stakeholders. The Framework aims to achieve the 10 targets of the 2011 Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS, to which Mauritius is signatory 25. Mauritius said that the report of Truth and Justice Commission was presented to the National Assembly in 2011. The Government set up an Inter-Ministerial High-Powered Committee to oversee the implementation of the recommendations in the report, and it has decided to implement a first set of 19 recommendations. In addition, a Land Research and Mediation Commission was set up to deal in depth with complaints made by persons aggrieved by dispossession or prescription of any land to which they claim to have an interest from colonial times. 26. Mauritius recalled that it had sent an update on the status of the implementation of the recommendations of the Truth and Justice Commission to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination following its review in 2013.  27. As regards the practice of detaining suspects on the basis of provisional information, Mauritius indicated that the Police and Criminal Evidence Bill stipulates that the police shall not arrest a person on the basis of a mere allegation by a third party, unless the necessary investigations have been conducted to verify that an offence has been committed or is about to be committed. Mauritius also noted that the Police Force is already equipped with a video-recording system to record statements from suspects involved in high-profile cases. 28. As regards the decriminalization of sodomy, Mauritius stated that further consultations were necessary on this issue. It indicated, however, that the Government intends to amend the Criminal Code in order to provide, inter alia, for the offence of marital rape. 29. The delegation stated that the Government is aware that retooling for the future requires a review of the Constitutional regime, including reform of the electoral system. It will present a White Paper on electoral reform in the light of the various proposals made by constitutional experts, including proposals on gender balance. It highlighted the need to bring Constitutional changes through consultations by engaging the population in a national debate. 30. With regard to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, Mauritius noted that although it was not yet a party to the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the Court, draft regulations for the implementation of the agreement have been circulated for comments. Mauritius has already forwarded an instrument of ratification with regard to article 8 of the Rome Statute. 31. Mauritius stated that it was still considering the Kampala amendments with regard to the crime of aggression and that any technical assistance in this regard would be welcome, once the decision is taken to incorporate the crime of aggression in the International Criminal Court Act. 32. In conclusion, Mauritius stated that the review would help it to evaluate how much it has achieved whilst also enabling it to identify areas for improvement. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 33. During the interactive dialogue, 72 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue can be found in section II of the present report. 34. A number of delegations commended Mauritius for holding wide consultation with civil society during the preparation of its national report, as well as for the submission of the mid-term follow-up report on the recommendations of the first UPR cycle. 35. India noted that Mauritius has launched the National Human Rights Action Plan, the Human Rights Portal and the Equal Opportunities Commission. It appreciated its commitment to ensuring the rights of women and children and combating violence against women and commended Mauritius for ratifying the OP-CRC-SC. 36. Indonesia welcomed the adoption of the National Human Rights Action Plan and the legal measures to ensure children’s rights. It applauded Mauritius on its chairmanship of the Global Forum on Migration and Development in 2012, which demonstrated Mauritius’ high commitment to protecting migrants’ rights. It made recommendations. 37. Tunisia welcomed the sustained economic, social and human development in Mauritius. It noted the new Ministry of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment, the National Human Rights Action Plan, the national torture prevention mechanism and the incorporation of the provisions of the Rome Statute into national law. It made recommendations. 38. Kenya commended Mauritius for adopting and implementing long-term policies and actions. It noted that economic, social and political indicators pointed to a healthy environment conducive to an enhanced socioeconomic life. It welcomed recent efforts to strengthen the national human rights institution. Kenya made a recommendation. 39. Kuwait noted that Mauritius had implemented strategies for combating poverty, including the establishment of the Ministry of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment. It observed the adoption of strategies on social housing, child development and training and employment and made recommendations. 40. Lesotho commended Mauritius on adopting legislation to combat trafficking in persons, ensure equal opportunities, protect human rights and provide legal aid, and encouraged it to continue in its efforts. It called on the international community to continue to support the Government’s efforts to fulfil its human rights obligations. Lesotho made recommendations. 41. Madagascar welcomed the creation of the Ministry of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment and the restructuring and strengthening of the National Human Rights Commission. It commended the efforts to enhance policies on education, elimination of poverty, women’s and children’s rights and judicial reform. It encouraged Mauritius to continue its efforts to consolidate the achievements in improving the human rights situation. 42. Malaysia commended Mauritius for its considerable progress in implementing the recommendation from the first UPR cycle on addressing violence against women and protection of children,. In particular, it welcomed the adoption of the National Action Plan to Combat Domestic Violence. Malaysia made recommendations. 43. Maldives noted with appreciation the implementation of the recommendations of the first UPR cycle. However, it noted that further progress could be achieved in improving existing safeguards for children and the child protection system. It expressed hope that further consideration would be given to these in the implementation of the recommendations from this second UPR cycle. It made recommendations. 44. Mauritania noted efforts to strengthen the rule of law through judicial reforms. It commended measures to protect persons with disabilities, provide public access to government institutions and ensure stability and security.  45. Mexico commended the establishment of the National Human Rights Action Plan and its related monitoring mechanism. It applauded the adoption of laws criminalizing domestic violence, while urging Mauritius to promote awareness campaigns to reduce physical, verbal and psychological aggression. It made recommendations. 46. Monaco congratulated Mauritius on the progress achieved in promoting and protecting human rights, especially those of the elderly, since the first UPR cycle. It asked for information on the work and human resources of the newly established National Observatory on Aging. It made a recommendation. 47. Montenegro welcomed the establishment of a committee to monitor the implementation of the National Human Rights Action Plan. It shared the concerns of the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography  at the number of children in care institutions that fail to meet the required standards. It made recommendations. 48. Morocco congratulated Mauritius on the launch of the National Human Rights Action Plan and the related monitoring committee. It asked for information on the development of the database of human rights indicators. It commended Mauritius’ commitment to small island developing States and made a recommendation. 49. Mozambique applauded Mauritius for establishing the Ministry of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment. It noted with satisfaction the strengthening of the rights of women, children and persons with disabilities and commended the side event on the Equal Opportunities Act and on the National Human Rights Action Plan. It made a recommendation. 50. Namibia observed that Mauritius enjoyed a strong democracy and a robust human rights framework, including the National Human Rights Action Plan. It made recommendations. 51. Nepal commended the adoption of the “Maurice Ile Durable” policy and efforts to ensure the rights of women, children, persons with disabilities and the elderly. It noted encouraging progress in increasing female participation in politics and decision-making. It made recommendations. 52. The Netherlands commended the efforts to improve women’s rights and combat gender-based violence, and stated that the full implementation of the action plan to end gender-based violence would be an important step. It called upon Mauritius to submit the requested follow-up information to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. It made recommendations. 53. Singapore noted Mauritius’ efforts to eliminate all forms of violence and abuse against children, including sanctions against child labour, and the special government unit providing psychotherapy and shelters for victims. It noted the efforts towards gender equality and combating gender-based violence. It made recommendations. 54. Nigeria commended the participatory approach adopted by Mauritius in preparing the report. It further commended the authorities for the progress made in promoting and protecting human rights across a broad range of areas. It made recommendations. 55. Oman commended the ongoing commitment to strengthening the legislative and institutional framework geared toward legal protection for all without distinction. It recalled that Mauritius was committed to complying with its international obligations and implementing the National Human Rights Action Plan. It noted the focus on the rights of persons with disabilities, equality for all and non-discrimination. It made a recommendation. 56. The Philippines was pleased with the enactment of several laws aimed at strengthening the human rights normative framework. It congratulated Mauritius’ efforts to safeguard the rights of women, children, the elderly and persons with disabilities and acknowledged Mauritius’ commitment to advancing the cause of migrant workers. It commended the formulation of the National Human Rights Action Plan and expressed appreciation that the Office of the Prime Minister was leading its implementation. It made recommendations. 57. Rwanda commended Mauritius on enacting legislation in a number of areas, including human rights protection, equal opportunities and combating trafficking in persons. It also commended the adoption of the National Gender Policy Framework. Rwanda made recommendations. 58. Senegal noted the progress made in implementing the recommendations of the first UPR cycle. It further noted the significant progress made in promoting and protecting human rights, that is reflected in initiatives such as the adoption of the National Human Rights Action Plan, the restructuring of the National Human Rights Commission and the measures taken to combat gender-based and domestic violence. It made recommendations. 59. Seychelles applauded the progress made in enhancing the rights and status of women, including the implementation of the National Gender Policy Framework and the National Action Plan to Combat Domestic Violence. It made recommendations. 60. Sierra Leone congratulated Mauritius on its recent ranking for democracy of 18 by the Economist Intelligence Unit, compared to the previous rank of 26. It welcomed the policies adopted and the institutions established to address the needs of vulnerable groups, poverty, human rights training and the ratification of CRPD and OP-CRC-SC. It made recommendations. 61. New Zealand welcomed the adoption of the policy of inclusive education and steps taken to improve equal access to education for children with disabilities, noting, however, that challenges remained in the implementation. New Zealand recalled that it had raised the issue of ongoing traditional attitudes and stereotypes concerning women in family and society in 2009. It made recommendations. 62. Slovenia noted positive developments in the area of children’s protection, especially in the context of abuse and violence, but noted that there was no mention of sexual and reproductive health education in schools. It made recommendations. 63. South Africa noted the ratification of international instruments and the establishment of institutional protection mechanisms to enhance the promotion, protection and enjoyment of rights by children. It also welcomed the launching of the National Human Rights Action Plan. It made recommendations. 64. South Sudan noted the efforts to reform the political and legislative systems, and increase women’s participation in politics and decision-making. It welcomed the ratification of OP-CRC-SC. It made a recommendation. 65. In its response to the issues raised so far, Mauritius stressed the relevance of the National Human Rights Action Plan and stated that the political will exists to implement it and that necessary budget will be allocated for it. It also referred to the steps taken to ratify or accede to major international human rights instruments, especially those that are still outstanding. 66. Mauritius stressed the importance of respect for its territorial integrity. It reiterated that the Chagos Archipelago, including Diego Garcia and Tromelin, form an integral part of the territory of the Republic of Mauritius. Chagossians are full-fledged citizens of Mauritius, enjoying the same rights as other Mauritian citizens. With a view to improving the well-being of the Chagossians, the Government of Mauritius has taken special measures in their favour, such as donating land for the construction of houses and setting up the Chagossian Welfare Fund. 67. With regard to the standing invitation to the special procedures of the Human Rights Council, Mauritius stated that although it has not yet extended a standing invitation, one of the recommendations of the National Human Rights Action Plan is to invite special procedures of the Human Rights Council to visit the country. Mauritius indicated that it will therefore consider extending such a standing invitation to the special procedures.  68. On ratification of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, Mauritius noted that as it is a small country with limited resources, it would not be able to allow migrant workers to bring their families. Mauritius explained that a series of measures have been taken to protect the legitimate rights of migrant workers. 69. On the issue of the asylum seekers, Mauritius indicated that it has not signed the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol, but that it always extend the necessary assistance to those who apply for asylum through the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. 70. Regarding gender-based violence, Mauritius reiterated the information already provided and highlighted some of the salient parts of the National Action Plan to Combat Domestic Violence and gave detailed information in this regard. 71. On  human rights training for police officers, Mauritius provided information on the measures taken, including a tailor-made training module on human rights. 72. Concerning enforced disappearances, Mauritius explained that it has not yet ratified the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CPED) as a number of policy matters are still being studied before a decision to ratify can be taken. 73. Regarding media reform and freedom of the press, Mauritius indicated that it is presently reviewing the media landscape with a view to reforming the media law. In this context, a report on media law reform has been commissioned with the aim of putting in place an appropriate media framework. 74. On the issue of school dropouts, Mauritius described numerous measures that have been taken, and stated that the results are tangible. 75. Regarding children, Mauritius recalled the information it had already provided on the comprehensive Children’s Bill, which was under preparation, and provided additional information. 76. Concerning the rights of persons with disabilities, Mauritius stated that many of the measures adopted had been highlighted in its opening remarks. 77. Spain enquired about measures to ensure that legislation on the electoral process has been amended in line with the ruling of the Human Rights Committee that the requirement for citizens to declare their ethnic and religious status constitutes a violation of article 25 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). It made recommendations. 78. Thailand welcomed the efforts to adopt legislation and reform institutions, and applauded the launch the National Human Rights Action Plan and the efforts to increase public awareness on human rights education through the media and in school curricula. It noted the National Action Plan to Combat Domestic Violence 2012–2015 and made recommendations. 79. Togo praised Mauritius for its strengthened democracy, nation-building activities and consolidation of the fundamental freedoms and rights of its people, despite the limited capacity and resources of the island. It noted the adoption of new laws and the ratification of international human rights instruments. It made a recommendation. 80. Trinidad and Tobago commended Mauritius’ commitment to raising public awareness of human rights and the international treaties through programmes, training and tertiary education. It was heartened to note the enactment of the International Criminal Court Act, which provides for the implementation of the Rome Statute. Trinidad and Tobago made recommendations. 81. Egypt welcomed the new legislation enacted to better guarantee protection of human rights in the areas of equal opportunities, human trafficking and legal aid. It made recommendations. 82. Turkey noted the launch of the National Human Rights Action Plan and welcomed the establishment of the Human Rights Monitoring Committee, the Equal Opportunities Commission and the Truth and Justice Commission. It made recommendations. 83. Uganda welcomed legislation on combating trafficking in persons, legal aid, equal opportunities and protecting human rights. It commended the ratification of OP-CRC-SC and made recommendations. 84. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland urged the Government to prioritize efforts to tackle gender-based violence. With regard to the comments made by the delegation of Mauritius about the British Indian Ocean Territory, the United Kingdom stated that it had no doubts about its sovereignty over the territory, which was ceded to Britain in 1814 and which has been a British dependency ever since. It made recommendations. 85. The United States of America expressed concern about commercial sexual exploitation of children and adults, failure to designate persons aboard fishing vessels in Mauritian territorial waters as victims of human trafficking, and the situation of children who work in dangerous conditions in agriculture, street vending, and domestic service. It regretted that the NHRC had inadequate resources. It made recommendations. 86. Uruguay highlighted the adoption of the National Human Rights Action Plan, the establishment of the Truth and Justice Commission and the enactment of legislation, regarding, inter alia, reporting police violations, equal opportunities, legal aid, amendments to the Criminal Code, abortion and the adoption of a national mechanism on the prevention of torture. It made recommendations. 87. Viet Nam noted progress in ensuring the rights and freedoms of all people, not least through the adoption of new laws, programmes and action plans, such as human rights awareness-raising and training programmes, and the establishment of the Equal Opportunities Commission. It made a recommendation. 88. Zambia commended Mauritius on its institutional and legislative framework. It welcomed the enactment of new legislation such as the Employment Rights Act, the Equal Opportunities Act and the establishment of the Equal Opportunities Commission and the Ministry of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment. It made a recommendation. 89. Zimbabwe noted that Mauritius was consolidating its legislative and institutional framework and amending policies and programmes to ensure greater enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights. It welcomed the ratification of OP-CRC-SC and CRPD and harmonization of its national laws with the provisions of those conventions. It made recommendations. 90. Algeria commended the inclusive consultation process with other stakeholders in preparing the national report. It welcomed the National Human Rights Action Plan — which it hoped would further the promotion and protection of human rights —, and the ratification of CRPD and the Optional Protocols to CRC. It made recommendations. 91. Angola commended the creation of the Ministry of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment and the reform of the national human rights institution. It welcomed the adoption of legislation on the protection and promotion of human rights and on legal assistance to groups of people in vulnerable situations. Angola made a recommendation. 92. Argentina welcomed the amendments to Mauritius’ legislative framework and the adoption of the National Human Rights Action Plan. It commended the National Preventive Mechanism Act, which gives effect to OP-CAT, and encouraged Mauritius to continue making progress in that area. It made recommendations. 93. Armenia noted the launch of the National Human Rights Action Plan and the establishment of the Equal Opportunities Commission. It welcomed the measures and initiatives taken to protect children’s rights, not least the ratification of OP-CRC-SC and the development of a national child protection strategy. It made recommendations. 94. Australia welcomed the Government’s significant efforts to bolster its national human rights framework through the creation and resourcing of the human rights ombudsman, the Equal Opportunities Commission, the National Human Rights Council and the Truth and Justice Commission. It urged the Government to continue disability-inclusive policies. It made recommendations. 95. Benin noted that many laws have been adopted since the first UPR cycle with a view to enhancing human rights protection. It welcomed the existence of a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles, as well as the Equal Opportunities Commission, which show that promoting and protecting human rights is a government priority. It made recommendations. 96. Bhutan commended the enactment of new legislation on protecting human rights and combating human trafficking. It noted the positive achievements in protecting the rights of women, children and persons with disabilities, combating domestic violence and providing training for law enforcement officers. Bhutan also commended the launch of the National Action Plan to Combat Domestic Violence. It made a recommendation. 97. Botswana commended the implementation of most of the recommendations from the first UPR cycle, in particular legislative reforms in human rights. It also welcomed the strengthening of human rights institutions and the ratification of OP-CRC-SC. It raised concerns about discrimination — especially on grounds of race —, sexual exploitation and human trafficking. It made recommendations. 98. Brazil noted the efforts to improve the functioning of the police. It welcomed the public policies to eradicate poverty and hunger, namely the Eradication of Absolute Poverty programme and the Food Security Strategic Plan. It expressed concern over women’s and children’s rights. It made recommendations. 99. Burkina Faso noted the numerous measures taken to implement the rights protected by different international and national instruments, and encouraged Mauritius to continue in this direction. It urged Mauritius to adopt legislation and a national strategy for the protection of children, to complete the construction of a new prison in compliance with international standards and rules to ease overcrowding and to continue the process of amending the Penal Code to criminalize marital rape. It made recommendations. 100. Cambodia noted with appreciation the progress made in implementing most of the recommendations from the previous UPR. It welcomed the launch of the National Human Rights Action Plan and the national platform to end gender-based violence. It made a recommendation. 101. Canada requested information on the status of plans to amend the Criminal Code to criminalize marital rape and decriminalize homosexuality, including progress achieved, remaining steps and deadlines for completion. It welcomed the National Human Rights Action Plan and the measures to promote human rights training and to facilitate access to information. It expressed concern about reports of sexual exploitation of children, and stressed the importance for the Government to intensify its commitment to programmes that protect children from violence and sexual abuse. It made recommendations.  102. Cabo Verde noted that Mauritius has highlighted democracy and rule of law, adopted a consistent legal and institutional framework and devoted significant means to its institutions. It noted the ratification of several international human rights instruments and the compliance of its national human rights institution with the Paris Principles. It encouraged the further transposition of international instruments into domestic law and made recommendations.  103. Chad noted that in addition to Constitutional provisions, Mauritius has adopted laws related to human rights protection, complaints against the police, national prevention mechanism, equality of opportunities and legal aid. It noted that the implementation of the recommendations in the action plan is being monitored by a committee for follow-up on the human rights situation. It further noted that Mauritius has been implementing international conventions to ensure that its citizens enjoy human rights. It made a recommendation. 104. China commended Mauritius’ human rights achievements and stable democracy. It highlighted the National Human Rights Action Plan to protect the rights of women, children, persons with disabilities and migrants. It made a recommendation. 105. Congo welcomed the efforts to implement legal reforms to take into account the recommendations from the first UPR cycle. It noted the establishment of the follow-up committee, the National Human Rights Action Plan and the Equal Opportunity Commission. It expressed satisfaction with Government initiatives that allowed awareness-raising of NGOs, women’s associations, vulnerable groups and members of the security forces. It commended the amendments to bring domestic legislation in line with international instruments. 106. Costa Rica noted the legislative and institutional measures, including the restructuring of the National Human Rights Commission and the implementation of the National Human Rights Action Plan. It encouraged the Government to continue to take measures to eliminate domestic and gender-based violence. It made recommendations. 107. Côte d’Ivoire noted the implementation of measures to prevent abuses — particularly those committed by members of security forces —, protect persons with disabilities and minors, and protect vulnerable persons against gender-based and domestic violence. It welcomed the “Mauritius Sustainable Island” programme, aimed at ensuring economic sustainability, and the law guaranteeing equal opportunity in the employment sector. It made recommendations 108. Cuba commended the efforts made in implementing the recommendations of the first UPR cycle and the measures taken to guarantee the rights to education and health. It noted progress in the justice system and the efforts to eliminate poverty through the creation of the Ministry of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment. It made recommendations. 109. The Czech Republic commended the adoption of the National Human Rights Action Plan and the creation of the monitoring body. It raised concerns about continued domestic violence, especially against women and children. It made recommendations.  110. The Democratic Republic of the Congo commended the adoption of new laws and the establishment of institutions. It enquired about the “Men as Partners” programme to combat sexual violence and requested information about its structure and operation. It made recommendations. 111. Djibouti noted the creation of committees and institutional bodies in different areas — from the protection of minors to equal opportunities —, and a coordination team to avoid overlap and encouraged follow-up of these new bodies. It noted the introduction of a human rights culture through a broad awareness-raising programme and welcomed Mauritius’ effective commitment to persons with disabilities. It made recommendations. 112. Ecuador commended the efforts in implementing the recommendations of the first UPR cycle and the ratification of OP-CRC-AC and OP-CRC-SC. It highlighted the new laws to prevent discrimination and violence against women. It made recommendations. 113. Ireland noted the positive steps taken since the first UPR, including the restructuring of the National Human Rights Commission, the adoption of legislation transposing the Rome Statute, and the development of a human rights action plan. It expressed concern about the criminalization of sexual conduct between consenting adults of the same sex. It commended the proposal for a media bill, however, underlined that Mauritius does not currently have a law enabling access to government information. It made recommendations. 114. Estonia encouraged Mauritius to continue to fully cooperate with the special procedures of the Human Rights Council. It encouraged Mauritius to increase protection of freedoms of expression, assembly, association as well as of the Internet, and to continue with the protection of children’s rights and the elimination of domestic violence. It made recommendations. 115. Ethiopia commended the adoption and implementation of legislation transposing the United Nations Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children into domestic legislation. It highlighted the efforts to change negative attitudes towards disability. It made a recommendation. 116. France welcomed Mauritius’ commitment to promoting and protecting human rights, as reflected through the ratification of CRPD and the Optional Protocols to CRC. It welcomed the legal achievements, particularly the 2012 law restructuring the National Human Rights Commission, and the women-oriented policy. It further welcomed the submission of the mid-term progress report. France made recommendations. 117. Gabon noted the “Mauritius Sustainable Island” project, which has been implemented in a holistic and democratic manner. It noted the efforts to eliminate racial discrimination and highlighted the measures adopted in favour of the Chagossians. It invited the international community and OHCHR to support the efforts to establish sustainable respect for human rights. It made recommendations. 118. Germany requested information on measures taken to implement human rights for children with disabilities, including effective monitoring of and protection from abuse and their inclusiveness in society. It asked how Mauritius planned to strengthen implementation mechanisms for strategies relating to several human rights issues. It made a recommendation. 119. Mauritius responded to additional questions. 120. With regard to recommendations to review section 16 of its Constitution, Mauritius explained that section 16 prohibits discrimination, but provides an exception for personal laws. This measure has historical origins, whereby, prior to independence, the Muslim community had requested the inclusion of such provisions. A consensus has not yet been reached among the different schools of thought in the Muslim community in the country with regard to Muslim Personal Law. Mauritius stressed the need to be culturally sensitive. 121. On the issue of discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, and specifically the decriminalization of the offence of sodomy, Mauritius stated that the Government had introduced the Sexual Offences Bill, but following the dissolution of Parliament in 2010, consideration of the Bill was deferred. After consultations, it was decided in 2013 not to proceed with the Sexual Offences Bill as further consultations were needed on the matter. The Government decided to introduce a Criminal Code (Amendment) Bill to provide, inter alia, for marital rape. 122. Regarding action to promote access to quality education and ensuring that children whose first language is different from the language of instruction are not disadvantaged, Mauritius clarified that Creole is a language of instruction in some primary schools and is also taught as a subject. 123. On the issue of trafficking in persons, Mauritius recalled the measures taken, including the setting up of a committee under the Office of the Prime Minister to address this issue. 124. On the issue of the death penalty, Mauritius stated that although the death penalty has been abolished by ordinary law, the Constitution has not yet been accordingly amended, which is the reason why the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights has not yet been ratified by Mauritius. 125. On the issue of overcrowding in prisons, Mauritius provided information on the 10-year strategic plan that had been developed to address the issue with the assistance of a consultant from the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 126. Mauritius provided additional information about the measures taken to combat violence against children and indicated that it had decided to include corporal punishment as an offence in the Children’s Bill in order to bring the laws more in line with the Convention on the Rights of the Child. 127. Mauritius concluded by thanking all those who had participated in the discussions, and assured the Council that it would give serious consideration to all the comments and recommendations. It underlined the importance of respecting different cultural practices in Mauritius: as a multiracial, multi-ethnic, multi-religious, multicultural country, Mauritius cannot be insensitive to the needs and cultural rights of every Mauritian. It added that it would continue its policy of active cooperation with international organizations and their institutions in the field of human rights. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations** 128. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue listed below enjoy the support of Mauritius: 128.1. Take necessary steps to ratify or accede to other major international human rights instruments which are still outstanding (Lesotho); 128.2. Reconsider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families (ICRMW) (Indonesia); 128.3. Endeavour to accede to ICRMW (Nigeria); 128.4. Consider ratifying ICRMW (Philippines); 128.5. Consider adhering to ICRMW (Cabo Verde); 128.6. Consider ratifying ICRMW (Burkina Faso); 128.7. Consider becoming a party to ICRMW (Chad); 128.8. Consider ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Rwanda); 128.9. Consider the possibility of ratifying the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CPED) (Tunisia); 128.10. Continue efforts to ratify CPED (Argentina); 128.11. Consider ratifying CPED (Burkina Faso); 128.12. Consider ratifying the third Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (OP-CRC-IC) (Montenegro); ** The conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 1 The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Ratify ICRMW” (Burkina Faso). 2 The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Become a party to ICRMW” (Chad). 3 The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Ratify CPED” (Burkina Faso). 4 The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Ratify the third Optional Protocol to 128.13. Consider ratifying the third Optional Protocol on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Seychelles); 128.14. Consider ratifying the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Armenia); 128.15. Consider ratifying the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its Protocol (Rwanda); 128.16. Further enhance its efforts to ensure adequate legal protection for all segments of the population (Kenya); 128.17. Ensure that the non-discrimination against women is reflected in the provisions of domestic law, including in the context of the current process of the constitutional reform (Cabo Verde); 128.18. Continue its efforts to finalize and submit the Children’s Bill (Indonesia); 128.19. Continue its efforts in the protection of children, including through the finalization of its Children’s Bill aimed at consolidating the various legislation on children’s rights and harmonizing all laws in line with the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Malaysia); 128.20. Finalize the National Child Protection Strategy and the Children’s Bill (South Africa); 128.21. Finalize the procedure of developing and adopting the Children’s Bill (Democratic Republic of Congo); 128.22. Continue finalizing the process of reviewing the legal framework on prohibiting, preventing and responding to all forms of sale and sexual exploitation of children, and to ensure the effective implementation of the framework through, inter alia, the harmonization of national legal and regulatory frameworks with ratified international instruments, accompanied by binding measures and mechanisms (Egypt); 128.23. Adopt and implement the Children’s Bill (Seychelles); 128.24. Allocate adequate resources to the National Human Rights Commission (United States of America); 128.25. That the Human Rights Monitoring Committee tasked with monitoring the implementation of the National Human Rights Action Plan 2012–2020, be given the necessary resources to ensure its effective functioning (South Africa); 128.26. Strengthen coordination within the new institutions for the protection of minors and persons with disabilities (Djibouti); 128.27. Give continuity to the measures for the creation of a more inclusive, plural and cohesive society (Nepal); 128.28. Continue with its resolve towards the promotion and protection of the human rights of all its citizens (Zambia); the CRC (OP-CRC-IC)” (Montenegro). 5 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Ratify the third Optional Protocol on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure” (Seychelles ). 128.29. Continue its reforms to improve policies and programmes towards the promotion and protection of all human rights (Lesotho); 128.30. Continue with the sensitization programmes in order to increase human rights awareness among the citizens of the country (Nigeria); 128.31. Extend its human rights education and awareness programmes to all sections of the population (Zimbabwe); 128.32. Continue and intensify its programmes of human rights mass education (Democratic Republic of Congo); 128.33. Continue the efforts related to human rights education and awareness-raising (Algeria); 128.34. Continue its efforts in the area of human rights education and training, particularly by implementing relevant provisions of the United Nations Declaration in human rights education and training (Morocco); 128.35. Request the international community to provide assistance to the project on incorporating human rights in the school curriculum (Kuwait); 128.36. Intensify the efforts to integrate human rights education in the national curriculum (Sierra Leone); 128.37. Pursue its plans to integrate human rights across the curricula of primary and secondary schools (Zimbabwe); 128.38. Continue its efforts towards human rights training, capacity-building and human rights education, especially through integrating human rights in the educational curriculum (Armenia); 128.39. Consider providing appropriate human rights education and training to public servants and law enforcement officials (Philippines); 128.40. Continue human rights training and awareness-raising activities, particularly for security forces (Côte d’Ivoire); 128.41. Continue implementing measures underway to intensify efforts in providing capacity-building and training programs on human rights for its law enforcement officials as well as judicial and legal officials (Bhutan); 128.42. Allocate adequate resources in order to strengthen the implementation of the Human Rights Action Plan 2012–2020 (Angola); 128.43. Share with other countries the good practice of holding broad consultations prior to the preparation of the report (Tunisia); 128.44. Share the best practices in the implementation of the National Plan on Human Rights, and in the preparation of the UPR (Mozambique); 128.45. Continue strengthening the government programme 2012–2015 to improve the situation in areas such as education, health, disabled persons and the social integration of vulnerable groups (Kuwait); 128.46. Continue and strengthen its efforts in favour of the elderly (Monaco); 128.47. Continue its efforts to enhance the protection of children and improve their well-being (Singapore); 128.48. Continue strengthening the national democratic institutions (Nepal); 
128.49. Disseminate widely the recommendations which will be made to Mauritius at the conclusion of this review (Burkina Faso); 128.50. Submit the required information to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (Netherlands); 128.51. Consider extending a standing invitation to the special procedures mechanism (Seychelles); 128.52. Consider issuing a standing invitation to the special procedures (Slovenia); 128.53. Consider extending a standing invitation to special procedures mandate holders (Tunisia); 128.54. Consider extending a standing invitation to all special procedures of the United Nations Human Rights Council (Montenegro); 128.55. Strengthen measures aimed at preventing and eliminating discrimination on the basis of race and ethnicity (Botswana); 128.56. Continue combating gender stereotypes and all forms of discrimination and violence against women (Tunisia); 128.57. Strengthen its policies of promotion and protection of the rights of women through public policies that foster gender equality in the country (Brazil); 128.58. Continue to promote gender equality and work to remove all barriers to the full and active participation of women across all spheres of life (Australia); 128.59. Strengthen its policies and measures on the promotion of gender equality in all socio-economic aspects as an effective tool to resolve unemployment and poverty (Viet Nam); 128.60. Continue the efforts in favour of the promotion of the rights of women and children, and in the area of the fight against discrimination (Algeria); 128.61. Continue to increase women’s representation in all national decision-making positions to 30 per cent in line with the SADC decision (Namibia); 128.62. Strengthen the equal participation of women in public office (Ecuador); 128.63. Strengthen its efforts to eliminate all forms of violence and discrimination against women and children (Senegal); 128.64. Strengthen the system of protection of the rights of the child by additional measures (Benin); 128.65. Continue to address the concerns of disadvantaged and vulnerable persons as a matter of priority, through programs aimed at promoting their fundamental human rights (Philippines); 6 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Extend a standing invitation to special procedures mandate holders” (Tunisia). 7 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Extend a standing invitation to all special procedures of the United Nations Human Rights Council” (Montenegro). 128.66. Speed up the realization of equality in the exercise of human rights by disadvantaged groups (Gabon); 128.67. Continue to take all necessary measures to ensure that no person is discriminated against by the State, including persons affected by HIV/AIDS (Spain); 128.68. Continue with actions aimed at improving the treatment of children with disabilities and children affected and/or infected by HIV/AIDS (Argentina); 128.69. Continue to address gender-based violence (Rwanda); 128.70. Continue with policies and plans aimed at eliminating domestic violence and violence against children (Ecuador); 128.71. Continue its positive efforts in addressing the issue of violence against women, including ensuring the effective implementation of recommendations made by its national platform to end gender-based violence which was introduced in October 2011 (Malaysia); 128.72. Further increase its efforts in order to fully implement its own action plan to end gender-based violence (Netherlands); 128.73. Continue its efforts to implement the National Action Plan to end gender-based violence and to further promote gender equality (Singapore); 128.74. Effectively implement protection mechanisms for victims of domestic violence and provide them with the necessary funding (Spain); 128.75. Improve emphasis and transparency in tackling gender-based violence by introducing specific measures to encourage more reporting by the public and increased investigations, prosecutions, convictions and sentences to deter those who commit gender-based violence (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 128.76. Strengthen efforts to combat, prevent, and respond to domestic violence, including by ensuring that victims of domestic violence have access to the necessary support and services that will enable them to leave abusive situations, in particular means to sustainably support themselves financially (Canada); 128.77. Strengthen the cooperation with civil society in the area of domestic violence, especially domestic violence against women and children and establish a more effective system of help to victims (Czech Republic); 128.78. Improve existing measures on combating violence against children as a key obligation under the Convention on the Rights of the Child and other international human rights instruments (Maldives); 128.79. Put in place initiatives aimed at raising awareness, especially among professionals who work in the area, about violations of the human rights of children, including sexual abuse (Brazil); 128.80. Redouble efforts to fight against ill-treatment of children, particularly by the investigation, trial and punishment of perpetrators (Uruguay); 128.81. Continue its efforts to strengthening and combating child trafficking (South Sudan); 128.82. Strengthen measures aimed at fighting human trafficking, including addressing its root causes, and exploitation of women and girls (Botswana); 128.83. Establish a body to coordinate government efforts to combat trafficking in persons and the worst forms of child labour (United States of America); 128.84. Provide adequate resources to enforce laws against human trafficking through the investigation, prosecution and, if found guilty, conviction of trafficking offenders, including in cases involving forced labour or commercial sexual exploitation (United States of America); 128.85. Carry out training to identify acts of torture for law enforcement personnel, the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, doctors, psychologists and any officials during the detention process. Additionally establish a complaints and follow-up mechanism (Mexico); 128.86. Ensure the effective implementation of the new laws related to human rights protection, in particular the mechanism of prevention and sanctioning of brutal acts committed by the police (France); 128.87. Amend the law concerning “certificates of character” so as not to hamper the rehabilitation and reintegration of former convicts in the labour market (Spain); 128.88. Expedite the process of introducing a media bill to enhance freedom of expression (Sierra Leone); 128.89. Continue to create employment opportunities and promote the development of income generating activities to uplift the poor (Namibia); 128.90. Continue its efforts to eliminate poverty, ensure the right to food and housing for its population and promote harmony among various communities (China); 128.91. Continue to make further inroads towards combating poverty and also ensuring that its population has an affordable access to a steady supply of water (Trinidad and Tobago); 128.92. Strengthen the measures aimed at alleviating extreme poverty (Côte d’Ivoire); 128.93. Continue the efforts in order to eradicate extreme poverty in the country (Cuba); 128.94. Maintain its efforts in the context of the right to housing (Djibouti); 8 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Provide adequate resources to enforce 
laws against human trafficking through the investigation, prosecution and conviction of trafficking 
offenders, including in cases involving forced labour or commercial sexual exploitation” (United 
States of America). 
9 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Carry out training to identify acts of torture for specialized personnel of the security forces, public prosecution, doctors, psychologists and any other related to the different moments of the detention process. Additionally establish a complaints and follow up mechanism” (Mexico). 10 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Expedite the process of introducing a media bill to enhance freedom of expression and individual rights” (Sierra Leone). 128.95. Consider mainstreaming sexual and reproductive health education in schools and offering access to contraception to young people (Slovenia); 128.96. Continue with the current efforts to implement the national plan to combat HIV/AIDS (Egypt); 128.97. Adopt and implement a national plan to combat HIV/AIDS, with an emphasis on prevention (Thailand); 128.98. Continue taking measures to further strengthen its education and health systems (Cuba); 128.99. Strengthen its education policies to ensure that no child drops out of school at primary level due to structural reasons (Namibia); 128.100. Step up efforts, particularly in the educational system, by taking additional measures to put an end to the phenomena of some students being absent from school during the elementary and secondary level, in order to reach the desired goals in this friendly country (Oman); 128.101. Consider adopting policies to encourage women and girls to choose non-traditional fields of education, including technical and vocational training (Egypt); 128.102. Adopt policies to encourage women and girls to choose non.traditional fields of education and work, including relevant technical and vocational training (New Zealand); 128.103. Continue to raise the literacy rate amongst women, particularly those living in rural areas (Namibia); 128.104. Expand activities to promote access to quality education for all children, in particular ensuring that children whose first language is different from the language of instruction are not at a disadvantage (Canada); 128.105. Promote the linguistic plurality through education (Djibouti); 128.106. Make further efforts in increasing participation of persons with disabilities at all levels of political and public life, especially the electoral process (Maldives); 128.107. Intensify the positive action already taken for improving the living conditions of persons with disabilities (Senegal); 128.108. Work to ensure inclusive, quality and free primary and secondary education to children with disabilities on an equal basis with other children (New Zealand); 128.109. Support steps regarding the rights of persons with disabilities with administrative arrangements, in order to ensure that these rights are enjoyed by all persons with disabilities within the society, especially children with disabilities (Turkey); 128.110. Continue implementation of the National Plan of Action, including social programs that aim at carrying out information and education activities with regard to people with disabilities and their social protection according to the relevant Convention which the country has ratified (Cambodia); 128.111. Continue increasing skills development programmes to public officers and staff, hospital staff and police officers on how to assist persons with disabilities as well as children with special needs (Ethiopia); 128.112. Consider deepening the measures taken for socio-economic promotion of the ethnic minorities (Cabo Verde); 128.113. Continue its current efforts aimed at improving the fate of the Chagossians (Gabon); 128.114. Maintain the philosophy of putting the people first in its development agenda (Nigeria); 129. The following recommendations will be examined by Mauritius which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-fifth session of the Human Rights Council in March 2014: 129.1. Sign and ratify ICRMW (Sierra Leone); 129.2. Accede to the Second Optional Protocol of the ICCPR (Australia); 129.3. Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR (Estonia); 129.4. Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (France); 129.5. Formally abolish the death penalty by ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR and support the next General Assembly resolution calling for a moratorium on the death penalty (Germany); 129.6. Proceed to the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) (Benin); 129.7. Proceed to the ratification the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Benin); 129.8. Ratify CPED (France); 129.9. Ratify the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees (France); 129.10. Withdraw its reservations to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) (Togo); 129.11. Withdraw its reservations to CRPD articles 9 (accessibility), 24 (education) and 11 (situations of risk and humanitarian emergencies) (Uruguay); 129.12. Ratify the Optional Protocol to CRPD (Australia); 129.13. Ratify the Convention on the Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Estonia); 129.14. Sign the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol (Spain); 129.15. Ratify the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the International Criminal Court (Estonia); 11 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Consider deepening the measures taken for socio-economic promotion of the ethnic minority which is the Creole population of the country” (Cabo Verde). 129.16. Ratify the Kampala convention and create an adequate national and legal policy framework to effectively deal with internally displaced people (Uganda); 129.17. Make further efforts to review the Constitution with a view to explicitly recognizing economic, social and cultural rights equally with other constitutional rights (Uruguay); 129.18. Grant a legal rank to the ICESCR that allows its provisions to be directly invoked in the domestic legal system (Uruguay); 129.19. Review article 16 (4) (c) of its Constitution to ensure that such a provision is not discriminatory against women (Trinidad and Tobago); 129.20. Extend a standing invitation to the human rights mechanisms of the United Nations (Costa Rica); 129.21. Extend a standing invitation to the special procedures of the United Nations (France); 129.22. Extend a standing invitation to all special procedures of the Human Rights Council (Czech Republic); 129.23. Finalize issuing a standing invitation to the United Nations mandate holders, which was already declared to be considered after the first round of the universal periodic review (Turkey); 129.24. Remove norms, including at the constitutional level, that may be deemed as an exemption from the prohibition of discrimination, and take practical measures for its implementation (Costa Rica); 129.25. Promote concrete action to combat inequality and guarantee the participation of women in social, cultural, political and economic development through affirmative action programmes (Mexico); 129.26. Continue to promote women’s participation in decision-making and political participation by providing necessary assistance and capacity building, as well as gradually increasing proportion of women parliamentarians (Thailand); 129.27. Consider introducing temporary special measures in areas where women are underrepresented or disadvantaged and raise awareness among parliamentarians and government officials about the necessity of such measures (Egypt); 129.28. Introduce special measures in areas where women are under.represented or disadvantaged and raise awareness among parliamentarians and other government organs (Uganda); 129.29. Adopt legislation that explicitly prohibits corporal punishment, and continue awareness raising campaigns on the negative effects of corporal punishment (Uruguay); 129.30. Ensure that the new Police and Criminal Evidence Bill fully addresses the practice of detention on the basis of “provisional information” by specifying that detention beyond a short time limit, defined in statute, is only possible once a suspect is formally charged (United Kingdom); 129.31. Repeal the sections of its Criminal Code that criminalize consensual homosexual activity (Australia); 129.32. Remove from the Criminal Code the penalization of same-sex conduct between consenting adults (Canada); 129.33. Repeal section 250 of the Criminal Code which criminalizes sexual conduct between consenting adults of the same sex (Ireland); 129.34. Enact legislation to provide for freedom of information requests (Ireland); 129.35. Formulate strict legislation to prevent abuse and exploitation of children with disabilities by parents or other members of society; and provide necessary measures to assist them in their quest of justice (Maldives); 129.36. Continue actions aimed at the return to the Chagos Archipelago of the Chagossians displaced from the island of Diego Garcia and the other islands of the Archipelago, and to consider including in these actions processes for the reparation of victims (Mexico).12 130. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. 12 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Continue action aimed at the return to their lands of the Chagossians displaced from the island of Diego Garcia and other islands from the Chagos archipelago, and that such actions include processes for the reparation of victims” (Mexico). Annex 
[English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of Mauritius was headed by Dr. the Hon. Arvin Boolell, G.O.S.K. Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade, and composed of the following members: • Dr. the Hon. 	Arvin Boolell, G.O.S.K., Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade, Head of Delegation; • H.	 E. Mr. Israhyananda Dhalladoo, Ambassador and Permanent Representative, Alternate Head of Delegation; • Mrs.	 Prameeta Devi Rasheela Goordyal-Chittoo, Ag. Assistant Parliamentary Counsel, Attorney General’s Office, Member; • Mrs.	 Bilkiss Rajahbalee-Cader, Deputy Permanent Secretary, Prime Minister’s Office, Member; • Mr. Anandrao Hurree, Deputy Permanent Representative, Member; • Mrs. Dilshaad Uteem, First Secretary, Member; • Mrs. Asha Muthusawmy-Pillay, State Counsel, Attorney General’s Office, Member; • Mrs. Vimla Huree-Agarwal, Second Secretary, Member; • Mr. Hambyrajen Narsinghen, Economic and Trade Adviser, Member; • Mr. Subhas Gujadhur, Member. 