Distr.: General 11 December 2013 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-fifth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Mexico * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.13-18942 *1318942* Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–147 3 A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–21 3 B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 22–147 5 II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 148–149 13  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 26 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its seventeenth session from 21 October to 1 November 2013. The review of Mexico was held at the 5th meeting on 23 October 2013. The delegation of Mexico was headed by José Antonio Meade Kuribreña, Minister for Foreign Affairs. At its 10th meeting, held on 25 October 2013, the Working Group adopted the report on Mexico. 2. On 14 January 2013, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Mexico: Burkina Faso, the Czech Republic and Kazakhstan. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Mexico: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/17/MEX/1 and Corr.1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/17/MEX/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/17/MEX/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Germany, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Mexico through the troika. These questions and the written replies from Mexico to the advance questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR). Summaries of additional questions posed during the interactive dialogue by Canada, Finland, Ireland, Italy, Montenegro, Spain, State of Palestine, Turkey, Ukraine, Austria and Bangladesh are to be found in section I, subsection B, of the present report. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation of Mexico, headed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, included representatives from institutions of the executive and legislative branches; the Governor of the State of Coahuila and Human Rights Coordinator of the National Conference of Governors; and the National Ombudsman. 6. The head of the delegation noted that progress had been achieved due to the commitment of the country’s political actors, civil society and the State’s decision to consolidate its human rights agenda, which was reflected in the Pacto por México (Pact for Mexico). 7. Mexico referred to the 2011 constitutional amendment on human rights, which represented the largest expansion of rights in the country since the promulgation of the 1917 Constitution. The reform recognized the human rights contained in international treaties to which Mexico was a party; recognized the principles of pro persona, universality, progressiveness, interdependence and indivisibility; expanded the mandate of the National Ombudsman; and, at the local level, strengthened the autonomy of the commissions for the protection of human rights. 8. Also important was the constitutional reform of the amparo trial (habeas corpus). Following the reform, the amparo trial could proceed in cases of acts or omissions by authorities that infringed human rights set out in international treaties. 9. A national human rights programme was being developed jointly with civil society. It would include the recommendations of national and international human rights mechanisms and organizations, as well as indicators and targets to measure progress. 10. The delegation noted that since 2012, Mexican authorities had outlined a new security and law enforcement policy which sought to comprehensively address the causes of insecurity. 11. In 2013, the General Victims’ Act was adopted, with a view to providing assistance, protection, attention and comprehensive reparation to victims of violence and of human rights violations and to restituting their rights. 12. In addition, a law on regulating the use of public force was being developed with the support of the International Committee of the Red Cross. 13. Referring to military justice, the delegation indicated that Mexico had recognized that under no circumstances should cases involving violations of the rights of civilian persons fall under military jurisdiction. 14. With regard to the protection of journalists and human rights defenders, Mexico recognized the important contribution of those actors and observed full respect for the right to freedom of expression. In accordance with a constitutional amendment, federal authorities were empowered to  investigate crimes involving violations of freedom of expression committed against journalists, or other persons or facilities, and the office of the special prosecutor for such crimes had been established. In addition, the Protection Mechanism for Human Rights Defenders and Journalists had been created. 15. Among the legislative reforms that the President had sent to Congress was an initiative to amend the Federal Criminal Code with a view to harmonizing the definition of the crime of enforced disappearance with international standards. Moreover, the withdrawal of the reservation to the Inter-American Convention on Forced Disappearance of Persons had been proposed. 16. In 2011, the Missing or Disappeared Persons Registry Act had been approved, establishing the obligation of the federal Government to develop a registry of disappeared individuals. Efforts were also being made to locate missing persons through local law enforcement offices, in coordination with the Missing Persons Search Unit of the federal Attorney General’s Office. 17. In the area of gender equality, Mexico had developed the 2013–2018 National Programme for Equality of Opportunities and Non-Discrimination against Women. Additionally, an initiative to reform the electoral legislation to guarantee parity between men and women had been sent to both chambers of Congress. 18. Mexico underscored the action taken to prevent violations of the rights of migrants, considering its situation as a country of origin, transit, destination and return. 19. Mexico had reached agreements to transform itself into a country that was more just, where all citizens — without exception — enjoyed the same rights. Congress and the Supreme Court had both played an important role in the fulfilment of the State’s international human rights obligations. 20. Mexico remained open to international scrutiny, as evidenced by the standing invitation to the specialized mechanisms of the United Nations and of the Organization of American States. 21. Mexico had been addressing the recommendations from the first review and, since 2008, had received visits from nine mechanisms of the inter-American and United Nations systems, as well as a visit from the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Mexico expressed appreciation for the support received from the High Commissioner. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 22. During the interactive dialogue, 87 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 23. Cambodia welcomed the National Development Plan 2013–2018 and the establishment of the Office of the Special Prosecutor for Crimes against Freedom of Expression. 24. Canada asked Mexico about measures taken to ensure domestic compliance with international obligations, including consultation with stakeholders, as well as about the impact of such measures. 25. Chile commended the harmonization of state and federal legislation through the Model Law on the Prevention and Elimination of Discrimination. 26. Colombia highlighted the cooperation of Mexico with human rights protection mechanisms and offered to share its experience regarding UPR follow-up mechanisms. 27. Switzerland expressed concern about the involvement of State agents in enforced disappearances, and about the persisting violence against women. 28. Malaysia commended Mexico for its commitment to fight poverty and took positive note of the establishment of the National Development Plan 2013–2018. 29. Cyprus commended Mexico for its role in the Human Rights Council and welcomed the promulgation of the General Guidelines for Police Institutions on Use of Force. 30. The Czech Republic commended the 2011 constitutional amendments. It expressed concern that human rights violations by military personnel continued to be prosecuted in military courts. 31. Denmark expressed concern that the delay in the implementation of the constitutional reform of the criminal justice system increased the risk of human rights violations, and that progress in combating impunity for gender-based violence had been limited. It noted that the fact that some sexual offence laws were contingent on the lifestyle of the victim was not in compliance with international standards. 32. Djibouti took note of progress made in the protection of human rights, and expressed concern about the situation of people of African descent. 33. Ecuador highlighted the State’s fight against inequality, as well as progress made in the areas of access to housing and the right to food.  34. Egypt welcomed the strengthening of the National Human Rights Commission and supported efforts by Mexico to implement national programmes. 35. Estonia noted achievements in promoting gender equality, and encouraged Mexico to ensure that all allegations of human rights abuses by the security forces are investigated. 36. Finland asked about measures to protect human rights defenders and journalists, especially women and indigenous human rights defenders, and to combat impunity. 37. France commended the commitment of Mexico to human rights and to guaranteeing respect for human rights while combating insecurity. 38. Germany appreciated progress made, in particular in the field of constitutional reform and legislation for the protection of victims of organized crime. 39. Guatemala commended Mexico for its progress in the area of human rights, including the adoption of relevant policies and national plans, and action to investigate and prosecute crimes committed against journalists. 40. The Holy See commended Mexico for progress made and for its commitment to, inter alia, the protection of migrants, economic well-being and education. 41. Hungary commended Mexico for the constitutional amendments reflecting its commitment to prevent and investigate human rights violations and ensure accountability. 42. India welcomed the wide-ranging legislative, institutional and policy reform implemented since the previous review of Mexico, which reflected its commitment to human rights. 43. Indonesia asked how the national human rights institution and the Ombudsman were conducting their work at the local level, and commended the constitutional amendments aimed at strengthening the protection of human rights. 44. The Islamic Republic of Iran drew attention to reports of violations of the human rights of indigenous people, racial discrimination, treatment in prisons and commercial sexual exploitation of children. 45. In response to observations, the Governor of the State of Coahuila described the efforts that had been made to implement human rights through judicial, administrative and policy models, in particular at the state and local levels. 46. An institutional model had been established, at the federal and state levels, to protect human rights throughout the country. The 32 human rights commissions had operative and financial independence and were separate legal entities. 47. The National Conference of Governors sought to strengthen the federal structure through democratic mechanisms, fully respecting the country’s institutions. The states strived together to respect human rights. 48. The President of the National Human Rights Commission reported on progress made and challenges being faced. One of the advances made, resulting from the observations and recommendations from the first cycle, was related to the military and civilian justice systems. 49. He stressed that the best way to defend human rights was to prevent violations of those rights through education and training, which strengthened institutions. In that regard, in 2012 Mexico had trained 1.5 million people, including federal, municipal and state public servants; in 2013 the number of trained public servants was expected to reach 2 million. 50. Senator Angélica de la Peña indicated that the Senate had defined torture based on the definition set out in the Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture. Unaccompanied minors and children in care were of particular concern; legislation on that matter was currently being examined through constitutional reform relating to the best interests of the child, which could give Mexico a comprehensive system for the protection of the human rights of children and adolescents. 51. Similarly, Representative Miriam Cárdenas stressed that the Constitution now included collective actions which allowed the protection of so-called diffuse rights and, with respect to social rights, included the fundamental rights of access to water and to high-quality, nutritious food. She indicated that Mexico was in the process of incorporating into the Constitution the rights to a lifelong pension for the elderly and to unemployment insurance. 52. The Deputy Minister of the Interior made comments on a number of issues raised by the delegations. 53. An amendment to the Federal Criminal Code had been published, through which the prosecutor’s capacity to respond had been increased, especially with respect to offences that involved violations of freedom of expression. From 1 January 2009 to 30 September 2013, through the work of the prosecutor, 458 prior inquiries had been opened for various offences involving violations of the freedom of expression. In total, 374 investigations had been concluded and 172 preventative protection and assistance measures had been adopted for at-risk journalists. 54. The Deputy Minister recalled the establishment by law of the Protection Mechanism for Human Rights Defenders and Journalists. The mechanism had received adequate financial support and the members of its Board included the Ombudsman, representatives of different governmental institutions and civil society representatives to ensure effectiveness and transparency. However, there could still be greater cooperation among federal entities. 55. The General Victims’ Act created the National System for Victims, which oversaw programmes and actions in support of victims at the federal and local levels; the Fund for Assistance and Reparation provided the necessary resources to support the initiatives. 56. Ireland asked about the impact of relevant measures on the number of cases of disappeared persons that had been investigated and resolved. It encouraged Mexico to continue to implement the 2011 Migration Act to protect migrants and those who worked to promote their human rights. 57. Italy asked whether the new criminal procedures facilitating the early conclusion of trial contained safeguards for women victims of crimes. 58. Japan commended the country’s renewed commitment to the promotion of human rights and efforts to implement the accepted recommendations from its first review. 59. Kenya noted the progress made since the first review of Mexico, with the aim of reinforcing constitutional guarantees and the rights and freedoms for all. 60. Lebanon commended the commitment of Mexico, including the role it played at the international level to enhance the human rights mechanisms. It referred to the constitutional reforms which set the stage for progress. 61. Libya commended the entry into force of the constitutional reforms, judicial protection and legislation to protect human rights. 62. Lithuania noted the establishment of protective mechanisms designed to safeguard human rights defenders and journalists, and expressed concern about reports on threats and violence against them. 63. Thailand commended Mexico for its constitutional amendments, such as the 2013 Victims’ Act, and welcomed its commitment to eradicate poverty. 64. Sweden noted the continued widespread use of torture and the existing impunity for crimes against journalists despite improvements to the legislation. 65. Mauritius commended the manner in which Mexico was dealing with issues relating to justice, human rights and elimination of discrimination. 66. Montenegro asked Mexico to elaborate on the constitutional changes relating to human rights, on the effectiveness of the National Human Rights Commission and on the role of autonomous public human rights institutions. 67. Nicaragua expressed concern about crime against migrants, a complicated issue aggravated by transnational crimes such as trafficking of persons. 68. The Netherlands expressed concern about violence against journalists, human rights defenders and women, and stated that access to safe abortion was still insufficient. 69. Paraguay welcomed the granting of constitutional status to human rights treaties, as well as the national human rights programme. 70. Morocco commended the constitutional amendments, and welcomed the reform of the mandate of the National Human Rights Commission. 71. Nigeria commended the participatory approach adopted in preparing the UPR report and progress made in promoting and protecting human rights. 72. Norway noted the persistence of violence against journalists and human rights defenders and expressed concern about serious human rights violations against undocumented migrants. 73. Oman recognized the efforts made by Mexico to include human rights in its Constitution, as well as initiatives aimed at eradicating hunger and poverty and ensuring equality between men and women. 74. Pakistan welcomed the strengthening of the National Human Rights Commission and commended the process of broad consultations. 75. New Zealand welcomed the General Persons with Disabilities Inclusion Act and the establishment of the National Council for the Development and Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities. 76. The Plurinational State of Bolivia welcomed the National Development Plan 2013– 2018, which incorporated lines of action in accordance with international human rights standards. 77. The Philippines commended the constitutional amendments and expressed its appreciation of the partnership with Mexico in pursuing initiatives to advance the rights of migrants. 78. Responding to observations, the representative of the Ministry of Defence stated that military justice was established in the Constitution as a specialized jurisdiction. He indicated that the goal of military justice was to preserve military discipline; it was not a privilege, and its existence should not provide impunity for members of the Armed Forces. 79. During the first review, recommendations were made to ensure that violations by members of the Armed Forces were always investigated and pursued within the civilian justice system. 80. Currently the situation was different. The Inter-American Court of Human Rights had issued various resolutions in which it had determined that article 57, II, a) of the Code of Military Justice contravened the American Convention on Human Rights, by granting the competency of military jurisdiction over crimes committed by military personnel against civilians, which must be dealt with in line with international standards. 81. The military justice system no longer heard cases of human rights violations alleged to have been committed by military personnel against civilians; every such case was transferred to the civilian justice system. 82. The representative of Províctima reported that arraigo (preventive custody) was under congressional debate at the federal level as well as in some states. That was not only because of the strong commitment of Mexico to full protection of the dignity of persons, in particular, procedural rights for detainees, but because of the recognition that such a measure should be applied only in exceptional circumstances, as a precautionary measure to protect life, and under judicial control and overview by the human rights bodies. 83. The delegation recognized that the issue of torture was one of the main challenges, and stressed the country’s commitment to address the recommendations of the Committee against Torture and other national and international human rights bodies. It recognized the importance of taking action to prevent, investigate and eradicate torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, and to punish perpetrators. 84. Poland expressed concern about impunity of crimes and about the risks faced by human rights defenders, journalists and NGO activists. 85. Portugal referred to recommendations conveyed during the first review and welcomed measures adopted to prevent acts of torture and ill-treatment. It referred also to violence against women and the Human Rights Defenders and Journalists Protection Act. 86. The Republic of Korea highlighted efforts to improve the judicial and legal system and the rule of law, as well as the National Development Plan, which established the fight against poverty as a Government priority.  87. Tunisia welcomed constitutional and legislative reforms in the field of human rights. It encouraged Mexico to pursue its efforts to combat discrimination against women in rural areas and in politics.  88. The Russian Federation commended steps taken to improve human rights, through legislation and the implementation of UPR recommendations.  89. Rwanda welcomed the introduction of the people’s health scheme, and constitutional amendments, including those to improve the quality of compulsory education. 90. Serbia commended the reforms that gave constitutional rank to international human rights treaties and efforts to harmonize the criminal justice system and legislation with the constitutional reform. 91. Sierra Leone welcomed the entry into force of constitutional amendments, as well as the Pact for Mexico, the People’s Health Insurance Scheme and the Women’s Justice Centres. 92. Singapore took positive note of progress in enhancing public security and respect for rule of law. It further noted, inter alia, efforts in combating human trafficking. 93. Slovakia welcomed legislative and institutional amendments adopted since the previous review. It welcomed efforts to develop a national human rights programme for 2013–2018. 94. Slovenia commended Mexico for its cooperation with human rights mechanisms and OHCHR, and its contribution to the work of the Human Rights Council. It reiterated previous concerns expressed about violence against women. 95. South Sudan noted positive developments achieved, and acknowledged the implementation of recommendations from the first review. 96. Spain asked if the new system of criminal justice had introduced special measures for detained persons with mental disabilities, to ensure their rights and guarantee due process. 97. Sri Lanka praised the reduction of the social services deficit, the progress made in the protection of migrants and the universal coverage of primary education. 98. The State of Palestine requested information about the coordination between the National Human Rights Commission and the state commissions. It praised the 2011 constitutional reform. 99. Maldives noted the establishment of the General Act for Equality between Women and Men and encouraged Mexico to improve measures to counter ongoing discrimination against women. 100. Costa Rica welcomed the new legal framework on migration and the constitutional recognition of the right to a healthy environment. 101. Cuba welcomed the progress made by Mexico and measures in favour of the promotion and protection of the rights of its population. 102. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia commended the implementation of the amparo procedure and encouraged Mexico to continue efforts to eradicate poverty.  103. Trinidad and Tobago commended the constitutional reform and efforts to confront human trafficking. 104. Romania took note of progress made, as well as of remaining challenges and the vision of the new Government to address them. It congratulated Mexico for its openness to and extended cooperation with human rights special procedures. 105. Turkey requested information on the action taken by authorities at state and local levels to promote and protect human rights.  106. Turkmenistan proposed that Mexico continue to promote education and human rights training at the national level and expressed appreciation for the signature of the Pact for Mexico by the major political forces. 107. Responding to additional comments, the Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs noted that in line with the constitutional reform, all Mexican judges — federal and local — were obliged to ensure that decisions conformed not only to national law, but also to international human rights law, as set out in the treaties to which Mexico was a party. 108. Recently the Supreme Court — as the constitutional court — had decided that all jurisprudence from the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, even in those cases in which Mexico was not a litigating party, was binding. By incorporating Inter-American Court of Human Rights jurisprudence, Mexico was able to incorporate into national law other sources of international law in addition to the treaties. 109. The delegation highlighted the withdrawal of a number of reservations to human rights instruments, action taken as part of the State’s compliance with its international obligations. 110. With regard to persons with disabilities, Mexico had made great progress by adopting two related national laws, the most recent of which was in full conformity with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. 111. Mexico reiterated its standing and open invitation to all mechanisms and special procedures of the Human Rights Council. 112. The Deputy Attorney General recognized the need to increase or build capacities to appropriately and urgently address the problem of disappearances; to this end a cooperation agreement with the International Committee of the Red Cross had been signed. On 21 February 2013, a high-level working group, comprising all public security institutions of federal Government, had been established to devise a unified policy regarding the search for disappeared persons. 113. The areas of work of the working group included: legislative harmonization in accordance with the international convention; maximization of information technology to produce a single database; and the creation of greater capacities and resources in the area of forensic science. 114. A unit specialized in the search for disappeared persons had been set up in the Office of the Attorney General of Mexico. The unit coordinated and cooperate with the federal prosecutors’ offices to consolidate a national plan for the search for disappeared persons. 115. Ukraine asked about the specific preventive measures planned to be taken under the 2012 National Programme for the Prevention and Elimination of Discrimination. 116. The United Arab Emirates noted efforts made by Mexico in economic, social and cultural fields, such as prioritizing the fight against poverty.  117. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland urged Mexico to prioritize human rights in the Pact for Mexico, and expressed concern about limits to freedom of expression, as well as about impunity and corruption. 118. The United States of America commended the recent legislation to protect human rights defenders. It encouraged speedy adoption of legislation related to the recent modifications of the Code of Military Justice.  119. Uruguay highlighted the reforms that gave constitutional status to human rights treaties and the policies derived from the Pact for Mexico. 120. Uzbekistan expressed concern about the rights of indigenous people, pretrial detention, use of torture by police officers, and enforced disappearances relating to drug cartels. 121. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela welcomed the constitutional amendment incorporating the human rights set out in international treaties, as well as several social programmes. 122. Viet Nam commended Mexico for its progress in legislative and institutional reform relating to national mechanisms for human rights.  123. Yemen noted the priority to formulate a national human rights programme for 2013– 2018 and the constitutional amendments to improve basic education, cultural diversity and parity in rights. 124. Algeria expressed hope that the recent judicial reform aimed at improving access to justice and the 2012 law on human rights trafficking would lead to comprehensive and positive results.  125. Argentina highlighted the reforms that incorporated the concept of human rights into the Constitution and welcomed measures against enforced disappearances. 126. Australia inquired about the cooperation between the National Human Rights Commission and its state counterparts. It drew attention to the training for prosecutors and police and the use of arraigo. 127. Austria inquired about the ongoing impunity for crimes against journalists. It requested information on the implementation of the General Act on Women’s Access to a Life Free of Violence and asked about the measures taken to address the delay in penal procedures.  128. Azerbaijan remained concerned about the situation and investigation of torture in the country and about the criminal justice system. It praised the country’s success in combating poverty and hunger.  129. Bangladesh noted the Migration Act, and requested Mexico to shed some light on the actions taken with regard to the prohibition of corporal punishment. 130. Belgium expressed concern about the situation of journalists, despite the establishment of the 2012 federal mechanism for the protection of human rights defenders and journalists.  131. Peru noted progress made and offered to share its experience with Mexico on how to promote the participation of, and consultations with, indigenous peoples. 132. Bosnia and Herzegovina noted the ratification by Mexico of international human rights protocols and congratulated Mexico for granting constitutional rank to those treaties. 133. Brazil welcomed measures to investigate violations against human rights defenders and journalists, and expressed concern that military courts still had jurisdiction to try cases of human rights violations committed by military personnel. 134. China recognized progress in medical services, social security, housing and quality of education, and commended national development programmes.  135. The President of the National Women’s Institute stated that Mexico condemned violence against women in all its forms. A national judicial framework for the prevention and punishment of related crimes, which applied to the federation and federal entities, had been established. 136. The National Women’s Institute had been able to bring together the work done by the three levels of government. It had also integrated state systems or councils on violence against women, and related local laws, in 32 federal entities. 137. In 2012, a reform had been undertaken to criminalize femicide in the Federal Criminal Code. The federation’s judiciary had introduced in 2013 the Protocol for Judging with a Gender Perspective. 138. Sexual and reproductive health was a basic and inalienable right; the delegation provided information on efforts made to promote the rights of indigenous women and to reduce maternal mortality. 139. The Deputy Minister of Interior noted the challenge to create a fairer and more equal State. Combating poverty was central to the Government’s agenda. As part of that policy, the President had launched the National Crusade against Hunger, a strategy to ensure that Mexicans in extreme poverty were able to have access to food and basic services, such as housing, education and health care. 140. As regards efforts to combat trafficking in persons, in addition to the legal framework, Mexico had created an interministerial committee to encourage the development of public policies, and a working group had been set up to investigate specific cases. 141. The immigration law recognized the fundamental rights of migrants to receive medical attention and to have access to education services provided by either public or private sectors, irrespective of their immigration status. In addition, the Supreme Court had issued a protocol to guide the actions of those who administered justice in cases affecting migrants, with a view to ensuring the best possible protection for migrants. 142. An official dedicated to guaranteeing the rights of migrant children and adolescents, in particular those who were unaccompanied and who were vulnerable to becoming victims of sexual exploitation and human trafficking, had been established. 143. The principle of non-refoulement was observed, and was applicable not only to refugees but also to other foreigners in danger or where there was a reason to believe that they would be in danger or subject to torture or other inhuman or degrading treatment.  144. Finally, with regard to the rights of indigenous peoples, Mexico had recognized the need to strengthen efforts to reduce the conditions of poverty and education gap faced by indigenous populations and groups. 145. The National Commission for the Development of Indigenous Peoples and the National Institute of Indigenous Languages had developed and implemented a strategy for the training, accreditation and certification of interpreters in indigenous languages, for the administration and administration of justice. In addition, the consultative council of the Commission had approved a protocol for holding consultations with indigenous villages and communities, and which included work already under way relating to consultations on various specific projects which affected indigenous zones. 146. The Governor of Coahuila said that federal entities had taken steps regarding the issue of disappeared persons, including the establishment of working groups aimed at consulting the families of victims and their organizations; the review of progress made in investigations; the integration, in the case of Coahuila, of an autonomous consultative group comprising civil society bodies defending human rights; dialogue with international experts in the field; the definition of enforced disappearance as a crime; and greater coordination with the new federal Government. 147. Mexico thanked the delegations for their questions and recommendations. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations** 148. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue and listed below will be examined by Mexico, which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-fifth session of the Human Rights Council in March 2014: 148.1. Continue reviewing all reservations made to international human rights instruments with a view to withdrawing them (Guatemala);  148.2. Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the ICESCR (Portugal; Bosnia and Herzegovina); 148.3. Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to CRC on a communications procedure (Portugal);  148.4. Consider its position with regard to Article 22.4 and Article 76 of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Bangladesh); 148.5. Recognize the competence of the Committee on Enforced Disappearances (CED), ensure the integration of the Convention in the domestic legal framework and create an official register of disappeared persons (France); Accept the competence of CED to receive individual petitions ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. (Spain);/Recognise the competence of CED in conformity with articles 31 and 32 (Uruguay);  148.6. Accede to Additional Protocol II of the 1949 Geneva Conventions (Estonia);  148.7. Ratify the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness (Paraguay);  148.8. Consider ratifying the ILO Convention concerning Equal Opportunities and Equal Treatment for Men and Women Workers (Rwanda); 148.9. Ratify the ILO Convention 189 on Decent Work for Domestic Workers (Uruguay);  148.10. Consider ratifying the Convention against Discrimination in Education (Sri Lanka); 148.11. Continue with its efforts and initiatives to enact the necessary legislation to protect human rights and promote them and to ensure economic development and a higher standard of living (Oman);  148.12. Work towards the swift incorporation in the federal legislation and legislation of state the provisions of international instruments, including the Rome Statute (Tunisia);  148.13. Continue efforts aimed at harmonization of national criminal justice system and legislation with the constitutional reforms (Ukraine);  148.14. Pursue constitutional reforms with a view to elaborate coherent criminal legislation at federal level (Slovakia);  148.15. Accelerate efforts with the Joint Senate Committees on Justice, National Defence and Legislative Studies regarding the early adoption of the reform to bring the criminal offence of enforced disappearance in conformity with standards established by the International Convention on the matter, in accordance with paragraph 86 of the Report (Chile);  148.16. Fully align its national legislation with the obligations arising from the Rome Statute (Estonia); 148.17. Review provisions regarding lengthy pre-trial detention without court and investigation decisions (Russian Federation);  148.18. Implement effectively the Victims Act, by harmonizing existing legislation. Include the provisions of the act in the new Penal Procedure Code. Ensure that the law is applied at all levels. (France); 148.19. That the legal framework against torture conforms to international human rights standards and that the Istanbul Protocol be applied in all federal states. Persons responsible for torture should be convicted accordingly in order to prevent the future use of torture (Germany);  148.20. Follow-up on the recommendations of CAT by ensuring that the definition of torture under all federal and state legislation is fully aligned with international and regional standards and by providing for the inadmissibility in court proceedings of evidence obtained under torture (Hungary);  148.21. Step up its attention and develop programmes for the social protection of citizens that suffer discrimination and social inequalities and eliminate all discriminatory provisions in legislation in some states (Russian Federation);  148.22. Introduce legal provisions effectively guaranteeing the safety of human rights defenders (Poland); 148.23. Harmonize the General Act on Women’s Access to a Life Free of Violence and pertinent federal legislation (Spain); 148.24. Unify, on the basis of objective criteria, the various definitions of feminicide in the different Criminal Codes of the country (Paraguay);  148.25. Unify, both at federal and state level, the criminalization of offenses related to trafficking in persons (Paraguay);  148.26. Consider adopting a framework law for the full realization of the right to food (Egypt);  148.27. Harmonize Mexican law with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Paraguay); 148.28. Take necessary measures to adopt or improve subsidiary laws in the alignment of constitutional and legal amendments related to human rights’ improvement (Thailand); 148.29. Consider appropriate steps to ensure that the National Human Rights Commission functions in an independent and impartial manner (India); Continue its efforts for ensuring the autonomy of national institutions responsible for the protection of human rights (Serbia);  148.30. Continue to strengthen and develop the National Human Rights Program 2013-2018 (Pakistan);  148.31. Ensure that the national human rights programme for 2013-2018 takes full account of recommendations accepted by the Government at the 2nd UPR cycle (Ukraine);  148.32. Continue its efforts to achieve social development and, in line with its national plan 2013-2018, as highlighted in the 4th Chapter in the Report (United Arab Emirates);  148.33. Continue its efforts to ensure that the new legal framework is effectively applied by all of the country’s authorities with the aim that all citizens are able to effectively exercise their rights (Montenegro);  148.34. Adopt the announced national human rights programme which will serve to define and measure courses of action for ensuring compliance with the constitutional principles relating to human rights (Montenegro);  148.35. Continue its efforts to strengthen and promote human rights (Yemen); 148.36. Consider intensifying its efforts for human rights education across the spectrum of the Mexican establishment and organisations for a proper dissemination and implementation of the bold measures announced in its National Report (Mauritius);  148.37. Always protect the rights of children (Djibouti);  148.38. Continue efforts regarding measures taken and legislation adopted for the effective application of the new constitutional provisions (Morocco);  148.39. Carry out follow-up mechanisms on UPR recommendations that enable to verify the implementation and impact of norms and measures adopted to promote equal rights and non-discrimination for all citizens, particularly vulnerable groups such as women, children , ethnic minorities and LGBT communities, among others (Colombia);  148.40. Ensure the implementation of gender equality laws, specifically the General Act for Equality between men and women, in all 32 states (Maldives); 148.41. Continue its promotion of legislation and actions aimed at eliminating discrimination and strengthening the protection of the rights of disadvantaged groups such as women, children and indigenous peoples (China); 148.42. Continue and intensify efforts to ensure gender equality and equity (Rwanda); 148.43. Further combat all forms of discrimination against women by running public awareness campaigns on women’s rights (Cambodia); 148.44. Undertake efforts towards eradication of gender stereotypes that have negative impact on the situation of women, in particular those from the rural areas (Slovenia);  148.45. Take steps to counteract forms of discrimination against indigenous women in rural areas (Paraguay);  148.46. Work more strongly against incitement to racial hatred and racist violence against indigenous persons and persons of African descent (Tunisia);  148.47. Take effective measures to prevent racial discrimination and violation of the rights of indigenous peoples (Uzbekistan);  148.48. Respect and defend life from conception to natural death, based on amendments of state constitutions, promoting a similar protection at federal and local levels (Holy See); 148.49. Implement the recommendations from CAT, as well as promote the use of the Istanbul protocol to determine cases of torture and to educate forensic experts (Sweden);  148.50. Ensure that investigations of alleged torture are not carried out by the same authority accused of committing acts of torture (Sweden);  148.51. That the implementation of the existing legislation to prevent and punish torture, both at federal and state level, remains a top priority (Portugal); 148.52. Pursue efforts to ensure that complaints in cases of torture, arbitrary detention and disappearances are duly investigated (Turkey); 148.53. Set up a system for receiving and investigating torture or ill-treatment complaints and suspend from duty suspects of torture, as well as amend its legislation and the definition of torture at the State level in accordance with the United Nations Convention against Torture (Azerbaijan);  148.54. Develop a national protocol for searching for reportedly disappeared persons and to investigate allegations of human rights violations and ensure that perpetrators are brought to justice and victims have received reparations (Iran (Islamic Republic of));  148.55. Take adequate institutional and legal measures to effectively respond to the problem of enforced disappearances and unpunished intentional homicides (Uzbekistan); 148.56. Implement the outstanding recommendations contained in the December 2011 report of the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances (Ireland);  148.57. Carry out an in-depth and systematic investigation into all allegations of enforced disappearances, bring perpetrators to justice and guarantee reparations to all victims, in particular to the families of the disappeared persons (Switzerland);  148.58. Create a database of disappeared and missing migrants, and that all authorities cooperate to prevent and punish crimes against this group (Norway);  148.59. Strengthen its efforts with regard to the fighting against enforced disappearances (Argentina); Continue adopting measures to effectively address the phenomena of enforced disappearance (Spain);  148.60. Abolish the practice of arraigo, as recommended by the Committee against Torture (France); Abolish the “arraigo penal” at the federal and state level as it is contrary to international human rights standards (Germany); 148.61. Take as soon as possible effective measures to bring conditions of detention in line with international standards, in particular to reduce overcrowding and to abolish the system of ‘arraigo’ and promote non-custodial measures (Austria);  148.62. Eliminate the practice of ‘arraigo’ at the Federal and State level and ensure that all detentions are carried out legally and recorded in a national database to which all of the parties will have access (Belgium);  148.63. Set up specialized bodies to investigate and prosecute allegations of flagrant violations of human rights committed in the framework of ‘arraigo’ (Belgium);  148.64. Bring the penal system of the country in accordance with the international standards, in particular to cancel the current mechanism of preventive detention and to strengthen the control over the behaviour of law enforcement agencies to stop the torture and ill-treatment (Uzbekistan);  148.65. Continue efforts to improve prison conditions (Egypt); Implement a comprehensive rights-based criminal and prison policy as well as policies designed to eradicate prison violence (Iran (Islamic Republic of));  148.66. Enact and enforce laws to reduce incidences of violence against women and girls (Sierra Leone);  148.67. Implement the designed public policy and launch a comprehensive awareness-raising campaign to end gender-based violence that includes sexual violence and feminicide (Slovenia); 148.68. Adopt a comprehensive program to fight violence and discrimination against women, with special attention to indigenous women (Brazil);  148.69. Respond to the challenges that prevent the effective implementation of the Gender Alert system (Spain);  148.70. Continue to prevent and combat violence against women, guaranteeing women’s access to justice and continue to improve support services (State of Palestine);  148.71. Ensure investigations of violence against women, and establish victim support programmes for affected women (Maldives); 148.72. Continue efforts to prevent and combat all forms of violence against women, and bring the perpetrators to justice, while ensuring women’s equal access to justice and improving support services, including for indigenous women (Austria); 148.73. Develop a model of care for violence against women and girls especially focused on indigenous population, in accordance with the acknowledgment made in paragraph 139 of the Report (Chile); 148.74. Implement in a stringent way on a priority basis the General Act on Women’s Access to a Life Free of Violence (Switzerland);  148.75. Take concrete measures to prevent and punish violence against women in all of Mexico’s 31 states, especially those with high reporting of killings and attacks of women and girls (Denmark); 148.76. Make a priority the prevention and punishment of all forms of violence against women (France);  148.77. Consider intensifying the implementation of its programmes and policies aimed at combating violence against women (Philippines); Continue strengthening its actions on the elimination of violence against women (Argentina);  148.78. Ensure full and effective implementation of the existing legislation and policies combating violence against women and adopt effective measures to reduce violence and impunity (Lithuania); 148.79. Continue to take the necessary measures to prevent violence against women, particularly migrant women and penalise those who commit these acts of violence (Nicaragua);  148.80. Adopt inclusive solutions at the state and local levels involving local enforcement agents, judiciary, community organisations and schools; end tolerance of and impunity for gender-based violence against women and girls, and that solutions include the situation of women in prisons (New Zealand);  148.81. Set up a comprehensive system to protect children’s rights and develop a national strategy to prevent and address all forms of violence (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 148.82. Ensure a better protection for children and adolescents against violence related to organized crime (Algeria);  148.83. Enhance the dissemination of information and figures regarding children and young persons who fall victims to the struggle against drug-trafficking (Italy);  148.84. Consider establishing mechanisms aimed at early identification, referral, assistance and support for victims of trafficking (Egypt);  148.85. Increase funding for federal human trafficking prosecutors and take steps to end the impunity for public officials complicit in trafficking (Norway);  148.86. Redouble efforts against trafficking in persons (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); Continue its policies and efforts to combat human trafficking especially those of women and children (Singapore);  Continue efforts to combat human trafficking both through the introduction of relevant legislation as through national and state programs and plans for its implementation (Costa Rica);  148.87. Standardise the criminalization of trafficking in persons at federal and state levels (Trinidad and Tobago);  148.88. Continue to implement the 2012 national anti-trafficking law, through efforts to investigate and prosecute trafficking offenses on the federal and state level (United States of America); 148.89. Further strengthen measures to combat migrant smuggling and trafficking in persons (Sri Lanka); Strengthen measures to combat human trafficking, including violence against migrants (Algeria);  148.90. Provide sufficient resources and capacity building for the Citizens Relations Unit to address dangers of a heavy military presence on the streets designed to curb organised crime (Sierra Leone);  148.91. Increase efforts in the war on drugs at all levels (Cuba);  148.92. Continue to enhance efforts to further strengthen the judicial institutions (Kenya); 148.93. Take measures to ensure the effective and timely implementation of the constitutionally mandated judicial reforms and police professionalization by providing integrated training and capacity building to stakeholders involved in the delivery of justice, including judges, prosecutors, lawyers, police and criminal investigations (Canada);  148.94. Accelerate the implementation of the 2008 constitutional criminal justice reforms to enhance transparency and provide procedural rights for accused persons (Australia);  Fully implement the reform of the criminal justice system in all Mexican states as soon as possible (Denmark);  148.95. Strengthen the criminal justice system in the country, to promptly and effectively investigate all alleged cases of enforced disappearances, disproportionate use of force, attacks, threats, harassments against human rights defenders, and ensure that perpetrators are brought to justice and victims receive reparations (Azerbaijan);  148.96. Continue to further strengthen the criminal justice system, including through capacity-building of judicial actors and law enforcement institutions so that its measures against organized crime be taken with due consideration paid to the rule of law and human rights and with an emphasis on due process (Japan);  148.97. Adopt and implement appropriate measures, enabling an effective functioning of public security forces subject to civilian control (Poland);  148.98. Continue efforts to ensure transparent adjudication of members of the security forces for human rights abuses, and continue efforts to reform the civilian police (United States of America); 148.99. Continue approving the necessary secondary legislation, regarding the constitutional reform, harmonizing it at state and federal level, and that training of judicial officers to ensure its effective application at both levels be conducted (Spain); 148.100. Continue the public security and judicial reforms and ensure their implementation (Turkey);  148.101. Strengthen the state of law and good governance, with more focus on capacity building for federal and local public officers for better law enforcement and human rights promotion and protection (Viet Nam); 148.102. Reinforce training of police and justice officials on the issue of violence against women in order to improve the response by the Mexican authorities (Portugal);  148.103. Further pursue the full investigation of alleged incidents of human rights violations by the police force, especially within detention centres (Cyprus);  148.104. Continue the fight against impunity, especially regarding violence against women, children, human rights defenders, journalists and all other vulnerable groups (Estonia); Fight against impunity through conducting exhaustive investigations of all allegations of human rights violations (France);  148.105. Consider fully utilizing the constitutional amendments more effectively to prevent and investigate human rights violations, punish human rights violators, and provide effective redress and remedy to human rights victims (Philippines); 148.106. Reinforce its efforts to tackle impunity and corruption nationwide via the creation of a federal anti-corruption institution with the ability to prosecute; and through the allocation of adequate resources to investigate and prosecute crimes against women and children (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);  148.107. Continue and intensify its efforts to fight corruption at all levels of public administration (Cyprus); Continue its efforts in fighting corruption at all levels (Cuba); 148.108. Continue to further strengthen the rule of law to provide a safe and stable living environment for its people (Singapore); 148.109. Expedite the process of amending Article 57 of the Code of Military Justice to ensure that human rights violations committed by armed forces against civilians are tried in civilian courts (Sierra Leone) /Promote the completion of existing initiatives to reform national legislation so that cases of alleged violation of human rights by the armed forces are considered in civilian courts (Peru) /Revise relevant legal provisions to ensure that all offences committed against human rights by military forces are submitted to civil courts (Brazil) /Undertake all necessary measures to ensure that Article 57 of the Code of Military Justice conforms with the Mexican constitution (Canada) /Launch a reform of the Code of Military Justice, so that the military cannot claim jurisdiction over human rights violations’ cases (Czech Republic) /Complete without delay the reform aiming to restrict the jurisdiction of military courts (Italy) /Provide its civilian courts with jurisdiction over human rights violations committed against civilians by members of the armed security forces to ensure accountability (Australia) /Ensure that all those responsible for human rights violations are brought to justice before civilian jurisdiction (France) /Continue to make every effort to end impunity, especially for armed forces’ human rights violations (Republic of Korea);  148.110. Continue its efforts to ensure the protection of children’s rights, including by fully implementing the 2012 federal justice for adolescents act and considering implementing of restorative justice system (Indonesia); 148.111. Install soon additional ‘Centros de Justicia para las Mujeres’ to improve access to justice for women throughout the national territory (Italy); 148.112. Keep ensuring women’s access to justice and improving support services (Egypt);  148.113. Consider introducing forms of administration of justice that respect the traditional justice systems of indigenous people, seeking differentiated access to justice (Costa Rica); 148.114. Preserve and protect the natural family institution and marriage as the conjugal union between a man and a woman based on their free consent (Holy See);  148.115. Ensure the effective implementation of the amendment to article 24 of the Constitution relating to freedom of religion (Holy See);  148.116. Establish effective protections for civil society and journalists, including the prompt and efficient investigation and prosecution of all threats and attacks made against these individuals (Canada);  Guarantee a safe, free and independent environment for journalists and ensure that all cases of threats, violence, attacks and killings against journalists are investigated by independent and impartial bodies (Austria); 148.117. Strengthen the federal mechanism for the protection of defenders and journalists and provide it with preventive capacity, taking into account the threat posed by organized crime networks against freedom of speech and press (Colombia);  148.118. Strengthen both the Mechanism for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders and Journalists as well as the Office of the Special Prosecutor for Crimes Against Freedom of Expression (Netherlands);  148.119. Strengthen and expand the Mechanism to Protect Human Rights Defenders and Journalists including by providing it with adequate resources and powers to carry out its work and creating a mechanism for consultation with indigenous and other communities affected by land transactions (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);  148.120. Continue to improve implementation of the Human Rights Defenders and Journalists Protection Act and the national protection mechanism at the federal and state level (United States of America);  148.121. Ensure that adequate attention is dedicated to the effective protection of journalists and human rights defenders (Australia); 148.122. Ensure an effective implementation of the protection mechanism for journalists and human rights defenders with properly managed funds and trained human resources and that Mexico investigates and prosecutes reported threats, attacks and disappearances (Norway);  148.123. Continue to ensure the budgetary allocations granted to the mechanism for the protection of human rights defenders, and recruit immediately the entire set of specialized staff to guarantee effective work by the mechanism and contribute thus effectively to the protection and security of all human rights defenders (Switzerland); Provide all necessary support to the Human Rights Defenders and Journalists Protection Mechanism and ensure full cooperation and its implementation at state and municipal levels (Czech Republic);  Ensure that human rights defenders and journalists are protected and not subject to defamation. The “protection mechanism for human rights defenders and journalists” should be funded appropriately and a clear division of jurisdictional responsibilities between the different levels of government should be achieved (Germany); Ensure full financial and political support for the Human Rights Defenders and Journalists Protection Mechanism, including by allocating to it necessary resources as well as trained and qualified staff (Hungary);  Provide real financial and human support for the recent protection mechanisms set up for journalists (Belgium); 148.124. Implement the recommendations by the United Nations Treaty Bodies regarding the protection of human rights defenders and journalists (Finland); 148.125. Take appropriate measures to combat violence and harassment against human rights defenders and journalists (France); 148.126. Take effective measures to prevent any violence against journalists or human rights defenders (Republic of Korea); 148.127. Pursue their efforts to reinforce legislative and institutional guarantees for human rights defenders and journalists exercising their right to freedom of expression and strengthen the fight against impunity in this regard (Slovakia); 148.128. Seek the guidance of special procedures in further enhancing the safety of all human rights defenders in the country by inviting the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders to visit the country (Hungary); 148.129. Strengthen the Special Prosecutor for Attention to Crimes against Freedom of Expression (FEADLE), and ensure reparation for the victims, as well as provide the mechanism for the protection of human rights defenders with the necessary support to fulfil its mandate (Sweden); 148.130. Step up its efforts to guarantee security of human rights defenders and journalists, and to put an end to all impunity in this area (Tunisia); 148.131. Ensure the effective implementation of the Protection Mechanism, under the Human Rights Defenders and Journalists Protection Act, to reduce impunity, especially the crimes against defenders of the human rights of migrants (Spain); 148.132. Improve the implementation of the existing framework in order to ensure the protection of human rights defenders and journalists (Romania); 148.133. Put an end to threats, attacks and deaths of journalists by allowing for comprehensive and impartial investigations (Belgium); 148.134. Strengthen measures to effectively prevent the violence against journalists and human rights defenders and impunity (Japan); 148.135. Fully and effectively implement the recently adopted laws in order to end threats, attacks and killings of human rights defenders and journalists and ensure prompt and effective investigation to bring those responsible to justice (Lithuania); 148.136. Integrate gender perspective when addressing impunity and lack of safety of journalists and human rights defenders (Slovenia); 148.137. Develop an investigation protocol with gender and ethnicity perspectives that can be used by the offices of Attorneys General of States in all cases where women human rights defenders report threats or attacks (Ireland); 148.138. Implement the CEDAW recommendations in implementing measures that will enable and encourage more women’s participation in state and municipal political life (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 148.139. Increase measures to guarantee equal opportunities for women and men in the labour market and provide the General Inspection of Labour with necessary human and financial resources requested to supervise and sanction discriminatory practices against women in the field of labour (Uruguay); 148.140. Allocate appropriate financial and human resources to effectively implement its National Development Plan on poverty eradication and access to education (Thailand); 148.141. Continue providing and allocating more financial resources to implement programmes and activities aimed at combating poverty and hunger (Malaysia); 148.142. Further strengthen its measures aimed at reduction of poverty and hunger for the welfare of Mexican people (Azerbaijan);  Continue the fight against poverty and hunger (Bangladesh);  Continue to prioritise the fight against poverty and hunger within the framework of the National Development Plan (Nigeria); 148.143. Continue to prioritize poverty eradication during the implementation of the National Development Program thus laying a more solid material foundation for its people to better enjoy their human rights (China); 148.144. Focus on marginalised groups or disadvantaged sections of society. Of particular relevance would be measures to improve health and education (India); 148.145. Continue strengthening its social policies with a view of increasing the standard of living of its people, especially the most vulnerable (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of));  Continue addressing constitutional reform especially in relation to combating rural poverty and improving programmes to support the access of low-income families to food (Trinidad and Tobago); 148.146. Further enhance institutions and infrastructure for human rights, policies and measures toward enhancing the social inclusion, gender equality and non-discrimination, favourable conditions for vulnerable groups of women, children, indigenous people, migrants and refugees (Viet Nam); 148.147. Do everything in the power of Mexico to minimize income inequalities between different social sectors and geographic regions (Cuba); 148.148. Consider the possibility of establishing a strategy for affirmative actions for the population in situation of poverty (State of Palestine); 148.149. Continue to prioritise public spending on social programmes in order to consolidate the gains made in reducing poverty, increasing access to health services as well as access to social security coverage (Nigeria); 148.150. Continue to eradicate poverty and create employment opportunities for youth (Pakistan); 148.151. Continue efforts to design housing financing schemes for the care of the population working within the informal market economy (Ecuador); 148.152. Ensure that agricultural policies make a more effective contribution to combating rural poverty (Egypt);  148.153. Strengthen sexual and reproductive health services to ensure that women who qualify for legal abortion services are able to access safe, timely, quality and free services in all Mexican states (Netherlands); 148.154. Intensify efforts to guarantee universal access to health services, information and education on health and sexual and reproductive rights, particularly for adolescents (Uruguay); 148.155. Increase efforts to reduce the maternal mortality rate, in particular by adopting a broad strategy on safe maternity, in which priority is given to access to prenatal, postnatal and obstetric quality health services (Uruguay); 148.156. Expand and reinforce its work in the health and education sectors, particularly to protect the rights of vulnerable sectors, including indigenous peoples, women and children (Australia); 148.157. Implement the CERD and the CEDAW recommendations on adequate and accessible health services in order to lower the high maternal and infant mortality among the indigenous population (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 148.158. Work to ensure executing the constitutional reform that aims at improving the level of compulsory education in order to ensure that education will contribute in the promotion of the principles of cultural diversity, equality in enjoying rights, and the importance of the family and others (Lebanon); 148.159. Ensure that the education contributes to cultural diversity, equal rights and the dignity of the person (State of Palestine); 148.160. Continue improving the quality of education for all, including indigenous children, through the provision of more infrastructure, educational materials and learning tools (Malaysia); 148.161. Continue working on the design of public policies to ensure access and continuance of children and adolescents in the different educational levels, especially children belonging to indigenous peoples and who are poor (Ecuador); 148.162. Further strengthen efforts in the field of the right of education, including by increasing the national budget allocation for education and promoting multi-cultural education (Indonesia); 148.163. Allocate more resources to education for vulnerable students and the disabled (South Sudan); 148.164. Review and assess how the rights of persons with disabilities, including mental disabilities, are guaranteed within prisons and establish a comprehensive training programme for law enforcement and prison staff to ensure effective implementation of the rights of persons with disabilities in detention facilities, including persons with mental disabilities (New Zealand); 148.165. Take the measures required to raise awareness among the population of the rights of persons with disabilities and to guarantee the effective exercise of their rights (Tunisia); 148.166. Ensure full and effective consultation of indigenous peoples on economic and development policies and projects affecting them (Finland); 148.167. Promote regional development in indigenous areas and strengthening local economies and improve living conditions to them (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 148.168. Continue to work with the Commission for Dialogue with Indigenous Peoples in order to ensure the respect of their human rights, self-determination and autonomy (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 148.169. Encourage more participation of indigenous peoples through the elaboration of a law that regulates their right to prior consultations (Peru); 148.170. Design and strengthen programmes to address human rights inequalities suffered by indigenous communities and afro-descendants (Sierra Leone); 148.171. Ensure prior consultations with indigenous communities in accordance with ILO Convention No.169 (Norway); 148.172. Recognize people of African descent as an ethnic group and promote their rights (Djibouti); 148.173. Continue to work towards the protection and defence of the rights of migrants (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); Continue efforts aimed at improving the situation of migrant workers in its territory (Argentina); 148.174. Continue to work with the countries of the region in special programs that address the situation of criminality against migrants (Nicaragua); 148.175. Effectively protect and guarantee the safety and human rights of migrants, especially women and children, including those that are in transit in the national territory, ensuring their access to justice, education, health and civil registry, incorporating the principle of the best interest of the child and the family unit (Holy See); 148.176. Maintain the humane policy that ensures the protection of the rights of migrants, and guarantee them access to justice, education and healthcare, regardless of their status (Nigeria). 149. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of Mexico was headed by H.E. Jose Antonio Meade Kuribreña, Secretary of Foreign Affairs and composed of the following members: • Mr. Juan Manuel Gómez Robledo, Vice minister for Multilateral Affairs and Human Rights, Secretary of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Lía Limón García, Vice minister for Human Rights, Ministry of Interior; • Mr. Ricardo García Cervantes, Deputy Attorney for Human Rights, Prevention of Crime and Community Services; • Mr. Juan José Ignacio Gómez Camacho, Permanent Representative of Mexico to the United Nations Office and other International Organizations in Geneva; • Ms. Lorena Cruz Sánchez, President, National Women’s Institute; • Mr. Alejandro Ramos Flores, Chief of the Legal Advice Office of the Estado Mayor of National Defense, Ministry of National Defense; • Ms. Eliana Garcia Laguna, Executive Secretary of Províctima; • Mr. Ulises Canchola Gutiérrez, Deputy Permanent Representative of Mexico to the United Nations Office and other International Organizations in Geneva; • Mr. Juan Manuel López Arroyo, Chief of Planning and International Relations Unit, Social Development Ministry; • Mr. José Luis Stein Velasco, Chief of the International Affairs Unit, Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs; • Mr. Alejandro Alday González, Director General for Human Rights and Democracy, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Eduardo del Río Holguín, Director General of Social Communication, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Ricardo Sepúlveda Iguíniz, Director General of Public Human Rights Policy, Ministry of Interior; • Mr. José Carlos	 Beltrán Benites, Director General for Human Rights and Democracy, Ministry of National Defense; • Francisco Javier Cedillo Tecaxehauatl, Director General of Legal Affairs, National Commission for Indigenous Peoples; • Mr. Jorge Zermeño, 	Coordinator of Advisors, Office of the Deputy Attorney General, Office of the Attorney General; • Ms. Noemi Olaya Festinher Arias, Coordinator of Advisors of the Undersecretary of Human Rights, Ministry of Interior; • Mr. Luis Rodrigo Morales Vélez, Minister for Labour Affairs for Europe Permanent Mission of Mexico to the United Nations Office and other International Organizations in Geneva; • Mr. Roberto de León Huerta, Deputy Director General of International Human Rights Policy, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Norma 	Angélica Contreras Felix, Deputy Director General of International Affairs, National Women’s Institute; • Ms. Alina Vlasich De la Rosa, Deputy Director for Environmental Issues, Institute of Social Security and Services; • Mr. Pablo	 Navarrete Gutiérrez, Legal Affairs Coordinator, National Women’s Institute; • Mr. Salvador Tinajero	 Esquivel, Second Secretary of the Permanent Mission of Mexico to the United Nations Office and other International Organizations in Geneva; • Ms. Gisele Fernández Ludlow, 	Second Secretary of the Permanent Mission of Mexico to the United Nations Office and other International Organizations in Geneva; • Mr. José Luis	 Ruiz Zarate, Director of International Information, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Alejandro González	 Cravioto, Director of International Affairs, National Commission for Indigenous Peoples; • Ms. Gabriela Nava Dominguez, Deputy Director of International Affairs, National Commission for Indigenous Peoples; • Ms. Claudia Isela Alvarado Covarrubias, Advisor, Ministry of Interior; • Ms. Sandra Romero Hernández, Advisor, Ministry of Interior; • Mr. Sinuhé Márquez Armenta, Advisor, Ministry of Interior; • Mr. Bernardo Morales Lara, Advisor, Ministry of Interior. Representatives of the States of the Republic and Local Governments • Mr. Rubén	 Ignacio Moreira Valdez, Constitutional Governor of the State of Coahuila, Coordinator of the Human Rights Commission of the National Conference of Governors; • Mr. Eduardo Olmos Castro, Major of Torreón, Coahuila; • Mr. José Vega Bautista, General Coordinator of Social Communications of the State of Coahuila. Representatives of the Congress Senate • Ms. Angelica de	 la Peña, President, Human Rights Commission, Senate of the Republic; • Ms. 	Lucero Saldaña Pérez, President, Foreign Affairs Non-Governmental Organizations Commission; • Ms. Diva	 Hadamira Gastelúm Bajo, President, Commission for the Equality of Gender, Senate of the Republic; • Ms. Adriana Dávila Fernández, President, Commission Against Human Trafficking, Senate of the Republic; • Ms. Rosa Adriana Díaz Lizama, Secretary of the Executive Bureau, Senate of the Republic; • Ms. Sonia Mendoza Díaz, Member of the Legislative Studies Commission, Senate of the Republic. House of Representatives • Ms. Miriam Cárdenas Cantú, Member of the Human Rights Commission, Chamber of Deputies; • Ms. Amalia Dolores García Medina, Migration Affairs Commission, Chamber of Deputies; • Mr. Roberto López González, Science and Technology Commission, Chamber of Deputies; • Ms. Loretta Ortíz Ahlf; Migration Affairs Commission, Chamber of Deputies; • Mr. Humberto Armando Prieto Herrera, Youth Affairs Commission, Chamber of Deputies. National Commission for Human Rights • Mr. Raúl Plasencia Villanueva, President of the National Commission for Human Rights; • Nabor Carrillo, Executive Secretary of the National Commission for Human Rights. 