  United Nations  A/HRC/23/5    General Assembly  Distr.: General 21 March 2013  Original: English  Human Rights Council Twenty-third session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   Romania Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–108 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–23 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  24–108 6  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  109–110 14  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  25 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its fifteenth session from 21 January to 1 February 2013. The review of Romania was held at the 3rd meeting on 22 January 2013. The delegation of Romania was headed by the Secretary of State, Bogdan Aurescu. At its 10th meeting, held on 25 January 2013, the Working Group adopted the report on Romania. 2. On 14 January 2013, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Romania: Czech Republic, Kenya and Qatar. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Romania:  (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/15/ROU/1);  (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/15/ROU/2);  (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/15/ROU/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden, Spain and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Romania through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR).  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The head of the delegation presented the national report and highlighted several measures undertaken and achievements made by Romania in the implementation of recommendations put forward during the 2008 universal periodic review. The delegation stated that the national report, which had been prepared based on a broad consultation with various State agencies, the national human rights institution and civil society representatives, provided comprehensive information on main measures taken to implement each of the accepted recommendations of the 2008 review. 6. The delegation stated that the legal system concerning the protection of human rights was complex and encompassed several institutions that complemented each other without overlapping. Thus, the Romanian Institute for Human Rights, the National Council for Combating Discrimination and the Ombudsman had complementary competences that included preventing all forms of discrimination; mediating cases of discrimination; investigating and sanctioning discrimination cases; organizing public opinion polls on various aspects regarding human rights protection; receiving complaints filed by individuals who have been aggrieved by public administration authorities through violations of their civic rights and freedoms and taking decisions on such complaints; providing victims of discrimination with specialized assistance; and notifying the Constitutional Court on the unconstitutionally of laws before their promulgation. 7. The delegation highlighted the importance for Romania of the protection of the culture and identity of persons belonging to national minorities, and indicated that Romania had ratified the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. Those two international instruments, along with the domestic legislative framework, represented important guarantees for an efficient protection of the rights of persons belonging to national minorities. 8. The delegation stated that in the framework of the antidiscrimination policies, the situation of the Roma minority remained of special concern. Romania had adopted a package of legal instruments in order to provide the authorities with the necessary instruments to efficiently combat discrimination against the Roma and protect vulnerable groups. The National Council for Combating Discrimination and the Ombudsman were the main institutions that contributed to effective enforcement of the anti-discrimination legislation and to the legal protection of the Roma population. 9. The delegation stated that as the necessity of a coherent approach towards improving the social integration of Roma had been acknowledged by Romania since 2000, policies and programmes had been carried out by the Government in the past decade in the framework of the national strategy for 2001-2011, which had envisaged measures in the areas of education, social protection and employment, culture, combating discrimination and promoting access to information and intercultural and inter-ethnic dialogue. Romania had adopted a new strategy for the inclusion of Romanian citizens belonging to the Roma minority for the period of 2012-2020, which was a multidimensional and comprehensive document aimed at joining the efforts of the central and local authorities, the Roma community and civil society and at continuing to address the social inclusion of Roma. The new Roma strategy focused on six areas: education, employment, health, housing and small infrastructure, culture, and social infrastructure. 10. The Romanian system of promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national minorities allowed the Roma minority to be politically represented and to participate in the decision-making process at all levels, central and local. Following the previous local elections of June 2012 and the parliamentary elections of December 2012, the Roma community was being represented in the Parliament by three members: two deputies and one senator, and at the local level by one Roma mayor and 161 members of local councils. 11. To address the drop-out rate in schools, the authorities had combined measures aimed at stimulating school attendance with those measures that were intended to identify children at risk of dropping out or who do not attend school, and to prevent such cases. The institution of the school mediators had been proven to be a useful instrument to monitor the situation and to prevent drop-out cases as well as deal with the school attendance of Roma pupils. There were currently 923 trained school mediators, of whom 437 were employed in the county school inspectorates, local authorities and county councils. 12. Regarding the administration of justice, major progress had been achieved in reforming and finalizing the legislative framework and putting in place and consolidating the relevant institutions, as well as implementing the newly adopted measures. Law No. 202/2010 (Small Reform Law) had already introduced a series of measures to simplify and render more efficient judicial procedures, including the length of proceedings, and thus anticipating the entry into force of the new procedural codes. An unprecedented legislative reform consisted of four new codes adopted by the Parliament in 2009 and 2010, aimed at simplifying and making the judicial practice more efficient. The new Civil Code had entered into force on 1 October 2011. The entry into force of the other three codes would follow in 2013 and 2014. 13. As to the strengthening of the accountability of magistrates, a new law on the matter had entered into force in January 2012. The law amended the scheme of disciplinary offences, increased sanctions, and strengthened the independence and the operational capacity of the Judicial Inspection of the Superior Council of Magistracy. Measures had also been taken for improving the transparency and objectivity of the procedure for the promotion of judges to the High Court of Cassation and Justice. Thus, the relevant law was already in force following its adoption by the Parliament in December 2011. 14. The delegation highlighted that Romania was the first European country to create a National Integrity Agency (NIA), which had been operational since 2007. The Agency was an independent, operational institution, competent to control and verify declared assets of public officials and cases of conflict of interest. Effective institutions were in place to prevent and combat high-level corruption; some of those were novelties at the European level or had achieved such significant results that they had become best practices for other countries (for example, NIA and the National Anti-corruption Directorate). 15. The National Anti-corruption Directorate had consistent and positive results, functioning as a specialized and independent structure competent to investigate high-level corruption cases. During the previous five years, over 90 per cent of its indictments had led to convictions and 90 per cent of investigations had been finalized in under 1.5 years. That activity continued to include significant numbers of senior politicians and officials. Regarding the prevention of and fight against local-level corruption and corruption in vulnerable areas, the National Anti-corruption Strategy, its corresponding action plan and the inventory of preventive measures had been approved by the Government in March 2012. The new Government assumed the Strategy in May 2012 and in June the Parliament unanimously endorsed the Strategy through a political declaration; implementation was ongoing. 16. The delegation highlighted the major role of media in promoting a culture of tolerance and mutual understanding. From this perspective, media awareness-raising programmes, such as “Colourful, but colour-blind”, “Dosta, overcome prejudices, learn to know Roma people”, and “Voices of the Roma community in society” had increased awareness on that matter. 17. Regarding the situation of sexual minorities, the delegation reported that the legislation provided for punishment for any form of discrimination based on gender and sexual orientation. The main form of public expression of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) community was the GayFest, organized annually in March. Due to the involvement of the public authorities that ensured the public order and close cooperation with the non-governmental organization ACCEPT, which was the main promoter of LGBT rights in Romania, the number of incidents during the event had significantly reduced to the extent that in the past two years, the event had taken place without any incident. 18. The delegation stated that Romania had constantly developed policies and implemented specific measures aimed at improving every citizen’s health and access to health care, especially for vulnerable groups. Although there was no strategy implemented at the moment in the field of sexual and reproductive health, the Ministry of Health had adopted targeted measures that had led to a gradual decrease in the abortion mortality rate. 19. On the issue of the rights of the child, the delegation stated that the top objectives of the 2008–2013 national strategy on children rights’ protection and its plan of action was to guarantee the improvement of the situation of children in a special protection system, further develop community services and ensure equal treatment for all children. 20. With regard to combating human trafficking, the National Strategy against Trafficking in Persons for 2012–2016 set up the framework of action for combating the phenomenon. The current National Strategy put forward a number of concrete measures aimed at preventing trafficking in human beings. Increasing the level of understanding of the dimensions, forms and implications of trafficking in human beings was essential for any successful prevention. In that respect, the mass media could play an important role in supporting and promoting clear-cut public information messages regarding the phenomenon. Organizing workshops for media representatives on the specificities of trafficking in human beings, including children, ensured the adequate promotion by the mass media of the anti-trafficking messages, the promotion of an accurate and complete perspective of such crime and the eradication of stereotypes regarding the victim profile and the forms of exploitation. 21. Regarding the protection of child victims of trafficking, the 2011 legislation established complementary detailed procedures with respect to identification and referral. Also, as a supplementary measure to ensure victims’ access to specialized assistance, regardless of their participation in the criminal proceedings, a clear definition of the term “victim of trafficking” had been introduced in 2010. 22. For victims willing to participate in the criminal trial, the National Agency against Trafficking in Human Beings initiated, in 2008, the Victim Coordination during Criminal Proceedings progamme. Its objective is different from that of the social assistance for rehabilitation and reintegration. In 2012, the victim coordination programme was further developed by including new partners: the General Inspectorate for Immigration and the Probation Directorate of the Ministry of Justice. 23. With respect to the cooperation of Romania with United Nations human rights mechanisms, the delegation highlighted the country’s commitment to address its backlog of reporting to the treaty bodies. In that respect, Romania had submitted a common core document as well as reports to the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. Romania had hosted three visits of special rapporteurs and agreed in principle to the visit of the Working Group on discrimination against women in law and in practice. Romania had also ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) and the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (OP-CAT) and would step up its efforts in view of a possible ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CPED) and the Optional Protocol to CRPD (OP-CRPD). The delegation confirmed the commitment of Romania to the protection and promotion of human rights.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 24. During the interactive dialogue, 71 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 25. The Czech Republic welcomed the ratification of OP-CAT. It encouraged Romania to strengthen efforts to combat discrimination, including discrimination and violence against women and children, Roma, LGBT persons and people living with HIV/AIDS. It made recommendations. 26. Ecuador took note of the judicial reform undertaken since 2008, as well as reforms carried out to combat human trafficking, particularly the trafficking of children. It also noted normative measures aimed at improving the legislative framework of the justice system in order to strengthen the judiciary. Ecuador made recommendations. 27. Egypt welcomed the adoption of a comprehensive package of legislative reforms in the field of judicial independence and administration of justice. It also appreciated the interest Romania attached to sharing the experience of transition with the emerging democracies of the Arab Spring. Egypt made recommendations. 28. Estonia welcomed the adoption of legislation related to women’s rights, progress achieved regarding the protection of children’s rights and the special attention given to freedom of expression. It asked for information on the status of the preparation of the National Plan of Action for Human Rights. It made a recommendation. 29. Finland commended Romania for its commitment to the principle of equality and non-discrimination. Finland welcomed the national Roma strategy and asked how it would be efficiently implemented. It also indicated that Roma children did not attend school and that they suffered from segregation. Finland made recommendations. 30. Tunisia noted the ratification of international instruments, the reform of the justice system, and the strategy for Roma integration. It welcomed human rights education for police and encouraged Romania to maintain efforts to combat violence against women through protection measures and public campaigns. Tunisia made recommendations. 31. Germany acknowledged efforts to achieve progress as regards the Roma minority but noted problems in implementing measures taken, by noting reports that Roma remained marginalized and excluded. It asked what legislative and other steps were planned to guarantee quality and inclusive education for children with disabilities. 32. Armenia welcomed the progress achieved in the implementation of the 2008 UPR recommendations. It commended Romania for its efforts to guarantee freedom of conscience and religion. Armenia noted measures to reduce corruption and to guarantee rule of law. It appreciated cooperation with special procedures and noted the recent visit of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery. It made recommendations. 33. Guatemala welcomed progress made regarding the protection of minorities. It encouraged Romania to implement the recommendation made by the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants and the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery in order to establish effective mechanisms to allow all migrant workers to lodge complaints. Guatemala made a recommendation. 34. The Holy See congratulated Romania for its efforts to eradicate discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation, as well as its efforts with respect to judicial reform, the Roma integration strategy 2012-2020 and the new legislation on education. It highlighted that the Civil Code recognized marriage as a union between a man and a woman. It made recommendations. 35. Hungary expressed its appreciation for the project to promote ethnic diversity in the world of labour. It noted the steps taken for the restitution of properties and inquired about the situation of historical churches, such as Roman Catholic and Protestant churches, which were highly affected by the restitution process. It made recommendations. 36. India commended Romania for steps taken to strengthen the judiciary. It expressed its appreciation for efforts to promote dialogue between religious minorities. While noting efforts made to eliminate discrimination against Roma people, India was concerned by the continued existence of racial stereotyping. India made a recommendation. 37. Indonesia wished to encourage programmes targeting the rights of Roma children and welcomed the attention given to education for Roma children, children from disadvantaged and rural areas and children with special educational needs. It noted the growing success of measures to combat corruption. Indonesia made recommendations. 38. Iraq noted the ratification of international instruments and welcomed the measures and new strategy for the integration of Roma, who had enjoyed parliamentary representation since 1990. It paid tribute to efforts to create independent bodies for the promotion of human rights. Iraq made recommendations. 39. Ireland observed that Romania faced many challenges, including preventing the stigmatization of children with disabilities and the economic exploitation of children, and combating patterns of discrimination against Roma. It noted that structures to meet those challenges were in place, but implementation remained key. Ireland made recommendations. 40. The Islamic Republic of Iran noted the updated information provided by the delegation of Romania, and shared concerns raised in the report by OHCHR about the violation of human rights by the Government. It made recommendations. 41. Italy asked for further information on the Roma inclusion strategy for the period of 2012-2020 and resources allocated for the implementation of the strategy, as well as on mechanisms for coordinating the authorities working to combat discrimination. It remained deeply concerned about the situation of vulnerable children. Italy made recommendations. 42. Jordan welcomed the ratification of CRPD and the OP-CAT. It expressed its appreciation for the strengthening of the institutional framework, particularly through amendments to the law on domestic violence. Jordan made recommendations. 43. Kuwait noted the National Anti-corruption Strategy for 2012-2015, and efforts to undertake judicial reform, improve the legislative framework and raise public confidence in the justice system. The Roma integration strategy, particularly its provision on equal access to health and employment, was commended. Kuwait made recommendations. 44. Lebanon highlighted the ratification of CRPD and OP-CAT, and commended efforts made in respect of the rights of Roma in the fields of social integration and education. Positive developments had also been observed in the field of persons with disabilities. Lebanon made a recommendation. 45. Libya welcomed the efforts of Romania to combat trafficking in persons through legislation, but noted a worrying increase in cases of trafficking, especially of women and children. It observed that Romania was a country of both origin and transit for human trafficking. Libya made recommendations. 46. Liechtenstein noted the national strategy on children’s rights, yet expressed concern about the practice of corporal punishment at home and in institutions. It commended Romania for amendments to the Criminal Code allowing the prosecution of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. Liechtenstein made recommendations. 47. Malaysia took note of the progress made by Romania in the field of human rights and fundamental freedoms, and welcomed the adoption of the Roma inclusion strategy, which was aimed at tackling social and economic disadvantage among Roma citizens. Malaysia made recommendations. 48. Mexico noted progress made by Romania in protecting and promoting human rights, and drew particular attention to the ratification of CRPD and OP-CAT. It encouraged Romania to strengthen its efforts to eliminate discrimination. Mexico made recommendations. 49. Morocco commended Romania for its law on religious freedom. It requested information on the situation of Muslims and the measures to promote religious worship by Muslims. Welcoming human rights training for students and public officials, it asked about similar training for law enforcement officials. Morocco made recommendations. 50. The Netherlands expressed its concern about discrimination against lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons. It also stated that there was no active strategy for sexual and reproductive health, despite high rates of teenage pregnancy and abortions and poor access to services. It made recommendations. 51. Norway expressed concern about children living in poverty and Roma children. It noted the problem of trafficking of women and children. Norway remained committed to assisting Romania to implement European standards and encouraging Romania to make use of the European financial opportunities. It made recommendations. 52. The State of Palestine welcomed the ratification of OP-CAT. It commended Romania for legislative and institutional efforts to combat torture and ill-treatment, and to improve conditions of detainees. It made recommendations. 53. Peru emphasized the ratification of CRPD and OP-CAT, and the adoption of the Roma integration strategy and the National Programme for Infrastructure Development. It asked about the political participation of organizations for national minorities and their representation at the national and local levels. Peru made recommendations. 54. The Philippines commended Romania for the ratification of OP-CAT and CRPD and noted that the Constitution guaranteed respect for international conventions. The Philippines welcomed efforts to combat trafficking in persons, especially the inter-institutional cooperation. It made a recommendation. 55. Poland welcomed the engagement of Romania in the field of human rights and its numerous efforts made in that regard. Poland made recommendations. 56. Qatar commended Romania for the concrete results it had achieved through legislative measures and judicial reforms. It welcomed the measures taken to combat human trafficking and the practice of torture. The ratification of CRPD, among other international instruments, was noted. Qatar made a recommendation. 57. The Republic of Korea highlighted the ratification of OP-CAT and CRPD, judicial reform and the introduction of protection measures for victims of domestic violence. Anti-discrimination measures for Roma were expected to continue and the adoption of the Roma inclusion strategy was praised. The Republic of Korea made recommendations. 58. The Republic of Moldova commended Romania for its programmes and legislative measures to prevent and eliminate domestic violence against women. It noted the opportunities created for minorities, in law and in practice, to use their mother tongue in official settings, education and the media. It made recommendations. 59. The Russian Federation thanked the delegation of Romania for the presentation of its national report and made recommendations. 60. Rwanda congratulated Romania on the ratification of OP-CAT and CRPD. Furthermore, it welcomed the progress made in preventing and combating trafficking in persons through the adoption and periodic updating of the relevant legislation on human trafficking. Rwanda made a recommendation. 61. In response to questions regarding Muslim minorities, the delegation stated that the Constitution guaranteed equality for all religious minorities. As Muslim communities had existed in Romania for many centuries, a number of Muslim places of worship were recognized as historical monuments. Muslim religious communities had been legally recognized and received State support. The representatives of the Muslim minorities participated in the meetings of the Advisory Council of the Religious Denominations of Romania. The delegation also noted ongoing good cooperation and dialogue between the Muslim minorities and the Orthodox Church. 62. Regarding the rights of persons belonging to national minorities, the delegation reiterated that Romania considered the protection of culture and identity of national minorities as a key priority and that there had been continuity in the policy on the issue despite the changes in Government. After the 2012 parliamentary elections, representatives of 20 minorities had been elected to represent their minority groups’ interest in the Parliament, including representatives of the Hungarian and Roma minorities. The 2012 local elections also ensured representatives of many ethnic minorities, including Hungarian, Roma, Russian and German, in the local governing bodies. The delegation also noted that a number of State bodies functioned to protect the interest of ethnic minorities. The legislation and Constitution also guaranteed the use of minority languages in courts and the public administration, as well as in local administrations, for minority groups constituting more than 20 per cent of the residents. 63. In response to the question on the restitution of properties nationalized during the communist period, the delegation provided information about a number of restitution claims that had been successfully resolved. About 60 per cent of the total number of requests for the restitution of properties had been resolved by the Government, as noted by the delegation. 64. As to the human rights training of police, the delegation stated that police continued to receive human rights training in the framework of the police academy curriculum and continuous professional development. Such training included subjects such as the international human rights norms, the European human rights system and the legal protection of human rights by police. Additionally, specialized training on non-discrimination, prevention of torture, child labour, rights of migrants and asylum procedures were also provided to police officers. 65. Slovakia took note of the ratification of CRPD and OP-CAT and the signature of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (OP-CRC-IC). It also welcomed the human rights training for teachers and pupils as well as human rights and administration of justice courses for personnel of the Ministry of Administration and Interior. Slovakia made recommendations. 66. Slovenia welcomed the Roma inclusion strategy, anti-discrimination training for public officials, human rights education and the gender equality strategy. Concerns were voiced about high teen-pregnancy rates, high infant and maternal mortality rates, and the status and effectiveness of the Ombudsman institution. Slovenia made recommendations. 67. Spain commended Romania on its ratification of OP-CAT and CRPD in fulfilment of the first UPR cycle recommendations. It asked what specific measures had been adopted to prevent and combat corruption in the judiciary and public health sectors. Spain made recommendations. 68. Sri Lanka noted the national cooperation mechanism to prevent child trafficking and initiatives to improve access to education. Initiatives to eliminate domestic violence, establish the National Mental Health and Anti-drug Centre, strengthen measures to combat human trafficking, and improve the investigation of human trafficking at the national level were commended. Sri Lanka made recommendations. 69. Sweden noted the greater role given to municipalities in integrating Roma into society under the new Roma inclusion strategy. However, it stated that a lack of accurate statistical information and collaboration with civil society might result in efforts not being entirely adapted to the community’s needs. Sweden made recommendations. 70. Switzerland noted that the role of Romania in secret detention centres or prisoner transfers had not been clarified in investigations. It also noted that Romania had not fully implemented the first UPR cycle recommendation that domestic legislation on housing meet obligations established in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. Switzerland made recommendations. 71. Thailand noted judicial reforms to ensure basic human rights for all, especially access to justice for victims of violence and human trafficking and improvements to detention conditions. It supported the efforts of Romania to raise public awareness of multicultural diversity, harmony and tolerance. Thailand made recommendations. 72. Timor-Leste welcomed the new Roma inclusion strategy and legislative and administrative measures adopted to improve prison conditions and strengthen prison oversight. It encouraged ongoing efforts to ensure the humane treatment of detainees. Timor-Leste made recommendations. 73. France appreciated the ratification of OP-CAT and CRPD, as well as the adoption of Law No. 137/2000 on anti-discrimination. France made recommendations. 74. Turkey commended the commitment of Romania to institutional and judicial reforms, especially the campaign to introduce a set of four new codes. It noted the country’s determination to combat corruption, as reflected in the re-adoption by successive Governments of an anti-discrimination strategy. Turkey made recommendations. 75. Ukraine encouraged Romania to continue efforts to combat negative perceptions of minorities through public awareness-raising and education initiatives. It urged Romania to continue promoting equal access to adequate health services for HIV-affected persons, particularly women, children and young people, notably in rural areas. Ukraine made recommendations. 76. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland welcomed efforts to combat torture and ill-treatment and to improve detention conditions, but shared concerns about allegations of ill-treatment and police brutality against children. It asked what steps would be taken to mitigate its concern over conflicts of interest within the Superior Council of Magistracy. It made recommendations. 77. The United States of America was concerned about threats to the independence of the judiciary and institutions fighting corruption, judicial inefficiency, inconsistent jurisprudence, and lengthy court proceedings. Equally disconcerting was the slow pace of property restitution to Holocaust and communist-era victims. It made recommendations. 78. Uruguay commended Romania for ratifying OP-CAT and CRPD and adopting measures to promote the integration of persons belonging to minority groups, particularly Roma. Uruguay made an observation regarding the lengthy procedures for late birth registration and the high infant mortality rate. Uruguay made recommendations. 79. Viet Nam noted with satisfaction the achievements made by Romania in promoting and protecting human rights since the first UPR cycle in areas such as legislative and judicial reform, education, health care and gender equality. Viet Nam made a recommendation. 80. Algeria applauded the ratification of CRPD and measures to ensure the rights of women, children, the vulnerable and minorities. It encouraged Romania to ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families to help combat discrimination. Algeria made recommendations. 81. Argentina congratulated Romania on the ratification of OP-CAT and CRPD. It also welcomed the development of a new national anti-corruption strategy for 2012-2015. Argentina made recommendations. 82. Greece appreciated many positive efforts to address human trafficking and asked Romania to elaborate on the results of those actions and share best practices. It also expressed its appreciation of the existence of several actions regarding human rights education and training and asked about the evaluation of those actions. Greece made recommendations. 83. Australia was encouraged by the various judicial reforms undertaken by Romania. It was concerned at reports of continuing incidents of human trafficking, discriminatory practices and racially motivated violence against Roma, and noted the overrepresentation of Roma children in State care. Australia made recommendations. 84. Austria welcomed the ratification by Romania of CRPD and asked how it would be implemented. It commended Romania on improvements to the legal framework for human rights protection, but was concerned about widespread discrimination against Roma, the LGBT community and other vulnerable groups. Austria made recommendations. 85. Bangladesh noted improvements in preventing human trafficking, strengthening the judiciary and ensuring opportunities for minorities to use their mother tongue. However, as noted by the United Nations treaty bodies, greater efforts were needed to address persistent discrimination against Roma, and the situation of migrants and their children. Bangladesh made recommendations. 86. Belarus highlighted concerns about discrimination against Roma, use of torture and excessive force by police, child cruelty, human trafficking, labour and sexual exploitation of children, and high infant and maternal mortality rates. The pending law on lustration contravened article 25 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Belarus made recommendations. 87. Belgium enquired about progress made in addressing the marginalization and social exclusion of Roma and whether any new initiatives were envisaged to improve their situation. It asked what steps had been taken to prevent discrimination based on sexual orientation. Belgium made recommendations. 88. Brazil welcomed the participation of minorities in Parliament and efforts to eradicate school segregation based on ethnicity. It called for complementary policies to address the low enrolment rates for Roma in schools and universities. It highlighted inequalities in access to health services. Brazil made recommendations. 89. Bulgaria commended Romania for enacting new legislation and ratifying several international human rights instruments. It asked that Romania share its experience in bringing its legislation into conformity with international legal instruments. It requested more information on the application in domestic law of the core human rights instruments. 90. Burundi welcomed efforts to integrate Roma into the society, particularly measures adopted to integrate Roma children into schools. It also supported endeavours to eradicate discrimination against persons living with HIV. Burundi made a recommendation. 91. Cambodia welcomed progress in the promotion and protection of human rights and efforts to implement judicial reform. It noted in particular the ratification of OP-CAT and CRPD and the adoption of a new Roma inclusion strategy for 2012-2020. Cambodia made a recommendation. 92. Canada asked for an update on the implementation of the 2008 UPR recommendations, specifically the adoption of further measures to combat human trafficking, including training for police officers in dealing with victims of trafficking and sexual violence, and the introduction of a witness protection system for trafficking cases. Canada made recommendations. 93. Chad noted that Romania was a party to the core human rights instruments, which demonstrated its commitment to human rights. It welcomed the major judicial reform under way and measures taken to eliminate discrimination against Roma. Chad made a recommendation. 94. Chile welcomed progress made in gender equality, human trafficking and protection of the rights of the Roma, particularly the development of new strategies on equal opportunities and Roma inclusion, amendments to legislation to combat human trafficking and measures to protect victims. Chile made recommendations. 95. China noted that, since 2008, Romania had improved its national legal framework, ratified CRPD and adopted measures to combat racial discrimination, human trafficking and domestic violence. It was, however, concerned about the situation of Roma. China made a recommendation. 96. The Congo highlighted progress in implementing the recommendations of the first UPR cycle, including improvements in the protection of the rights of women, children and persons with disabilities, human trafficking and education. It encouraged Romania to take steps to integrate minorities and improve their living conditions and to prevent child trafficking. 97. Costa Rica welcomed advances since 2008, particularly legislative improvements to combat human trafficking and practical measures to ensure the right to education, including increasing the budget allocation and developing a policy to promote the inclusion of children from ethnic minorities. Costa Rica made recommendations. 98. Cuba expressed its appreciation for the information, from the national report, on the implementation of the first cycle recommendations, particularly regarding the rights of children, women, and persons with disabilities. It welcomed actions taken to combat discrimination against persons with disabilities and improvements in mental health legislation. Cuba made a recommendation. 99. Cyprus commended measures taken by Romania to implement the first-cycle recommendations and meet its human rights obligations. It welcomed efforts to provide equal employment opportunities for all, including persons belonging to minority groups, women, persons with disabilities and persons living with HIV. Cyprus made a recommendation. 100. With regard to questions on the experience of Romania in bringing its legislation into conformity with international human rights standards, the delegation emphasized that, according to the Constitution, treaties on human rights to which the country was party were part of national law and were applied with priority in relation to domestic law. Romania noted that, consequently, the domestic courts gave direct effect to, for example, the European Convention on Human Rights and the case law of the European Court. 101. On the question regarding results obtained in combating corruption, Romania reiterated particularly that effective institutions had been put in place to combat corruption. It noted that in 2012, Romania was ranked 66th in the corruption perception index issued by Transparency International, compared to 75th in 2011. 102. Regarding the recommendation to ratify the Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, the delegation, by recalling the contribution of Romania to the creation of the Court, gave its assurance that Romania would ratify the Kampala amendments. 103. On the remarks made regarding secret detention centres and illegal transfers of persons, the delegation stated that Romania had approached this issue in a spirit of profound attachment to the rule of law and promotion and protection of human rights. It was noted that a Parliamentary inquiry committee had carried out an investigation between 2005 and 2008. The Committee’s conclusions were public and attested that the authorities had no information that CIA secret detention centres ever existed in Romania or that the country’s airports could have been used by the CIA for transfer or detention of suspected terrorists. The delegation stated that, following a request to the judicial authorities in 2012 by a person being detained in Guantanamo, the judiciary had opened a criminal investigation which was currently under way. The head of the delegation gave assurances that authorities would carry out the investigation with the full respect of the principles of rule of law and human rights. 104. With regard to the issue of allegations of Holocaust denial in public educational materials and school textbooks, the delegation stated that it had no information of such reports and urged that those reports be transmitted to the Government. It was noted that, since 2000, specific courses had been organized in schools to teach the history of the Holocaust. 105. On the issue of the segregation of Roma, the delegation stated that it had decreased significantly due to the actions taken by the Ministry of Education as well as various legislative measures. Various concrete activities had been carried out, including the creation of inclusive classes, where children feel that they are treated in the same way as others. 106. The delegation also presented some statistics in relation to employment, health and housing of Roma. Roma were employed in the labour market because of State assistance, including counselling and professional training. The National Agency for Employment used a set of personalized stimulation measures, giving each person the opportunity to benefit from one or more services. As to the access of Roma to health services, the delegation highlighted two initiatives: health mediators’ services and vaccination campaigns. The pilot programme Social Housing for Roma Communities, which is conducted by the National Housing Agency, comprises a plan for the construction of 300 social housing units in 11 cities, with easy access for Roma to education and to health and social services. 107. On the issue of trafficking in persons, the delegation highlighted that the efficiency of governmental bodies that work to combat human trafficking had improved. The number of convictions had increased, with 276 traffickers convicted in 2011. The number of victims referred to assistance doubled. Furthermore, the participation of victims in the criminal process improved as a result of different approaches taken for their protection and assistance. 108. The delegation expressed its gratitude to all delegations for their participation, comments and questions. The delegation stated that Romania would closely analyse the recommendations and provide its answer to them in due time. The delegation expressed its regret that it was not in a position to provide answers to all questions due to time constraints.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**  ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 109. The following recommendations will be examined by Romania, which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-third session of the Human Rights Council in June 2013: 109.1. Consider the ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Armenia) (Costa Rica); 109.2. Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Peru); 109.3. Continue efforts aiming at ratifying the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Argentina); 109.4. Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families as well as ILO Convention no.189 (Philippines); 109.5. Accede to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Belarus); 109.6. Ratify the Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Chile); 109.7. Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Guatemala); 109.8. Encourage the ratification of ICRMW and CPED (Kuwait); 109.9. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (The State of Palestine); 109.10. Consider ratifying the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic Social and Cultural Rights (Costa Rica); 109.11. Consider ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Thailand); 109.12. Consider ratifying the Optional Protocol to Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Costa Rica); 109.13. Complete the process of fully implementing its obligations under the Rome Statute into domestic law, in particular by adopting provisions allowing for full cooperation with the International Criminal Court (Liechtenstein); 109.14. Ratify the Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute, if possible with a view to contributing to the activation of the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court over the crime of aggression at the beginning of 2017 (Liechtenstein); 109.15. Ratify the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Algeria); 109.16. Continue with the implementation of the new Civil and the Civil Procedure Codes, and the Criminal and the Criminal Procedure Codes, which will ease the jurisdiction procedures (Turkey); 109.17. Carry on with legislative and administrative arrangements suggested by the treaty bodies, in order to further improve effective implementation of the Government’s anti-discrimination strategy (Turkey); 109.18. Continue to introduce the legislative and institutional measures necessary to enhance the independence and effectiveness of its National Human Rights Institution (Egypt); 109.19. Consider reviewing the status and effectiveness of the NHRI to ensure its full compliance with the Paris Principles (Poland); 109.20. Take all necessary measures to make its National Human Rights Institution fully compliant with the Paris Principles (France); 109.21. Provide the Ombudsman institution with necessary resources to carry out its mandate in an effective way (Poland); 109.22. Revise the status of the National Human Rights Institution with a view to ensure its full compliance with the Paris Principles (Ukraine); 109.23. Consider establishing an independent Ombudsman for children (Ukraine); 109.24. Consider establishing an independent Ombudsman for children (Poland); 109.25. Heed the call of the Committee on the Rights of the Child for an independent ombudsman for children (Slovenia); 109.26. Continue to develop the institutional framework with respect to the promotion and protection of human rights (Jordan); 109.27. Specify the respective areas of competence of the various institutions and bodies combating discrimination to ensure the effectiveness of the system for preventing and combating discrimination, as recommended by CERD (Slovenia); 109.28. Consider providing the National Council for Combating Discrimination, Ombudsman and relevant institutions with adequate resources to carry out their work and to minimize duplication of their functions and competence areas (Thailand); 109.29. Continue its policies on improving the rights of the child (Jordan); 109.30. Continue its work on improving the situation of children’s rights, by taking further measures to develop comprehensive policies and strategies, and by strengthening the education system, healthcare and social protection (Norway); 109.31. Apply the  2008-2013 National Strategy on children right’s protection and promotion which should ensure that special attention will be paid to children belonging to the most vulnerable groups, such as children living in poverty, Roma children, children with disabilities, children with HIV/AIDS and streets children (Ecuador); 109.32. Ensure the existence of sufficient budget allocations and follow-up and evaluation mechanisms for the full implementation of the “2008-2013 National Strategy on children right’s protection” in order to support children and the most vulnerable population (Ecuador); 109.33. Take effective measures to implement the National Strategy for the protection and promotion of children’s rights (2008-2013) (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 109.34. Fully implement the National Strategy for the protection and promotion of children’s rights (Republic of Moldova); 109.35. Continue paying special attention for the protection of the rights of children (Armenia); 109.36. Continue taking legislative amendments and strengthen necessary policies to enhance child rights, particularly children with disabilities in light of relevant provisions of international conventions ratified by Romania (Qatar); 109.37. That further efforts be deployed to assure that the respect of fundamental rights of the child and the fight against violence, sexual exploitation, human trafficking, child labour and any other form of child exploitation remain a priority of the Government (Italy ); 109.38. Continue working to promote human rights in the country, specifically the rights of minorities (Guatemala); 109.39. Further intensify training for State and local authorities and the public at large on international human rights standards, particularly those in relation to sexual orientation and gender identity (Finland); 109.40. Further consolidate achievements in domains such as legislative and judicial reform, education, health care and gender equality, and continue to put more priorities and national resources on other important fields of job creation and social security, with greater focus on improving the overall conditions of vulnerable groups of children, women, youth and persons with disabilities (Viet Nam); 109.41. Transmit the overdue reports to the Human Rights Committee, the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and the Committee against Torture (Czech Republic); 109.42. Continue implementing legislation prohibiting all forms of discrimination (Chile); 109.43. Intensify even further its efforts undertaken in regard to initiatives and awareness-raising programmes on gender equality and the protection of LGBT rights (Estonia); 109.44. Continue implementing and strengthening measures to promote equality and protection against all forms of discrimination, placing special emphasis on the most vulnerable minority groups (Cuba); 109.45. Take practical action to ensure that existing anti-discrimination legislation is properly enforced so as to combat discrimination against its citizens, both systemic and overt, based on in particular, ethnicity, sexual orientation and gender identity, and HIV status (Australia); 109.46. Continue its efforts aiming to ensure full equality between all citizens and to combat discrimination, including discrimination against persons belonging to minorities, especially with regard to employment, education, health, and access to justice (Egypt); 109.47. Continue efforts to combat discrimination and respect minority rights (Argentina); 109.48. Implement measures to eliminate discrimination against minority groups, in  particular the Roma and children in vulnerable situations, including children with disabilities, with HIV/AIDS, abandoned children or victims of violence and guarantee their access to education, housing, medical care and health services (Costa Rica); 109.49. Continue its efforts in ensuring implementation of its strategy of anti-discrimination in order to guarantee the equal treatment of Romanian people, including the minority (Cambodia); 109.50. Enforce legislation banning discrimination against Roma community (Bangladesh); 109.51. Pursue further efforts to combat discrimination against the Roma (Brazil); 109.52. Continue the efforts to eliminate discrimination against the Roma and carry out a major awareness campaign among the population regarding the situation of the Roma (Chad); 109.53. Take further appropriate and effective measures to eliminate discrimination against Roma and ensure in particular their access to education, healthcare and employment without discrimination (Norway); 109.54. Take the necessary measures to guarantee non-discrimination of ethnic Roma, through the full implementation of the 2012-2020 strategy and campaigns to combat all forms of discrimination and xenophobia against this group (Spain); 109.55. Ensure the implementation of more comprehensive anti-discrimination measures to guarantee the equal treatment of the Roma people (Republic of Korea); 109.56. Continue the efforts made in favor of the integration of the community of the Roma, the eradication of religious intolerance, human trafficking - especially of women and children -, and discrimination against people living with HIV / AIDS (Holy See); 109.57. Take effective steps to implement its legislative measures and policies on discrimination and segregation of Roma people (India); 109.58. Further strengthen legal provisions and comprehensive policies and strategies to ensure safety and fulfilment of rights of religious minority (Bangladesh); 109.59. Ensure the systematic collection and publication of statistical data on hate crimes (Austria); 109.60. Ensure, as established by the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD), access to housing without any discrimination, particularly to the most vulnerable groups, including the Roma (Chile); 109.61. Amend current legislation on housing in order to explicitly prohibit all forms of discrimination based on ethnic origin as with regard to access to housing (France); 109.62. Establish an effective legal framework to protect the right to adequate housing of persons belonging to the Roma minority and ensure that cases of discrimination against them are swiftly investigated (Austria); 109.63. Continue its efforts to ensure equal access to housing and protection from discrimination and segregation on the basis of race or any other prohibited ground of discrimination (The State of Palestine); 109.64. Guarantee without any discrimination to all disadvantaged groups of the population, including the Roma, access to adequate housing (Switzerland); 109.65. Address inequalities in access to health services, in particular with regard to children affected by HIV/AIDS (Brazil); 109.66. Continue training efforts in the area of human rights education for security personnel and in the field of discrimination against vulnerable groups (Tunisia); 109.67. Intensify efforts to fight against discrimination and intolerance, and against racist and xenophobic political discourse (Tunisia); 109.68. Combat racist stereotypes and incitement to hatred by intensifying efforts to promote tolerance (France); 109.69. Developing a high-priority action plan to raise public awareness on all forms of discrimination and ill-treatment of children ((Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 109.70. Ensure an adequate publicity and carry out awareness campaigns in order to increase the understanding among the population on the rights of LGBT persons (Belgium); 109.71. Ensure that acts of discrimination against LGBT persons and persons belonging to other vulnerable groups are properly investigated and perpetrators held accountable (Austria); 109.72. Adopt appropriate measures to counter discrimination of LGBT people and to develop policies in order to integrate existing legislation against discrimination at various societal levels in Romania (Netherlands); 109.73. Include accurate Holocaust information in all public school lesson plans (United States of America); 109.74. Promptly submit responsive, non-discriminatory legislation to Parliament for property restitution seekers as mandated by the European Court of Human Rights decision from January 2011 (United States of America); 109.75. Publish an enhanced and updated national action plan by 2015, which will detail how the government will eliminate the excessive use of force and beatings against prisoners and pre-trial detainees including updating existing educational programmes for police officers (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 109.76. Improve the condition of detainees, prevent cruel treatment in detention places and ensure the adequate level of medical services to detainees (Russian Federation); 109.77. Take further measures to decrease serious challenges in access to justice by victims of domestic violence and human trafficking (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 109.78. Redouble efforts to combat violence against women and girls, and ensure greater representation of women in managerial and decision-making positions (Peru); 109.79. Take legal measures to guarantee the effective protection from sale of children, contemporary forms of slavery and forced labour (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 109.80. Intensify the work regarding the protection of children from violence, promptly identify and suppress cases of cruel treatment of children (Russian Federation); 109.81. Adopt a national strategy to protect the rights of children against all risk of violence, in particular, sexual abuse, neglect, abuse, and increase its efforts to combat child labour (France); 109.82. Implement laws and policies to protect children from economic exploitation, including from all forms of child labor and child begging, and that aim at ensuring that street children go to school (Canada); 109.83. Intensify the fight against the perpetrators operating in the area of human trafficking (Norway); 109.84. Further strengthen efforts to combat trafficking in persons providing assistance and protection to victims, and ensuring that perpetrators of such crimes are brought to justice (Sri Lanka); 109.85. Continue the good work in the area of addressing the problem of human trafficking (Greece); 109.86. Intensify its efforts to address trafficking (Sweden); 109.87. Step up national efforts in combating all forms of human trafficking (Egypt); 109.88. Further ensure effective implementation of anti-trafficking legislation (Republic of Moldova); 109.89. Step up efforts in the area of combating trafficking of human beings, as well as invite the Special Rapporteur on human trafficking to visit the country (Belarus); 109.90. Intensify investigations of cases on trafficking of human beings for the purpose of labour exploitation and investigate all reports on alleged  involvement of state officials in offenses related to human trafficking (Belarus); 109.91. Provide the victims of human trafficking with the effective access to legal remedies and compensation (Belarus); 109.92. Strengthen its efforts to come up with measures to prevent the crime of human trafficking and its participation in bilateral and regional cooperation to address the issue of human trafficking (Republic of Korea); 109.93. Take urgent measures to fight trafficking in persons, particularly women and children, including through international and regional cooperation, also with countries of destination in order to prevent the spread of this phenomenon and work to prosecute perpetrators (Libya); 109.94. Address the root causes that result in human trafficking (Libya); 109.95. Strengthen its efforts to combat human trafficking and provide support services to victims, particularly for women and children and Roma people (Australia); 109.96. Step up its efforts for the protection and assistance of trafficking victims, including through adequate state financing for victims’ shelters (Liechtenstein); 109.97. Take measure to prevent trafficking in children and their sexual exploitation by establishing education programmes and developing support services for them (Belgium); 109.98. Develop and implement a strategy to address the root causes of children living in the street, define preventive and protective measures and ensure that street children attend school and provide them with health-care services, shelter and food (Liechtenstein); 109.99. Strengthen the full implementation of legislation on corporal punishment of children, including through awareness raising, education programmes, and appropriate complaints mechanisms (Liechtenstein); 109.100. Consider introducing legislation prohibiting corporal punishment of children (Poland); 109.101. Continue to pursue reforms intended to ensure the independence of the judiciary and make judicial processes more transparent and efficient (Australia); 109.102. Appoint accomplished, independent prosecutors to lead the Prosecutor General and National Anti-Corruption Directorate offices, ensuring they remain free from political interference (United States of America); 109.103. Modernize the infrastructure of the country's penitentiaries and improve social reintegration programs for detainees, particularly ethnic Roma (Spain); 109.104. Intensify the support of the family as an institution (Holy See); 109.105. Amend the Citizenship Law to ensure that all persons born in Romania obtain a nationality; otherwise they would be stateless, regardless of the status of the parents (Mexico); 109.106. Take action to facilitate a prompt and consensual solution to the issue of the restitution to religion institutions of worship places confiscated under the communist regime, as a way of assuring the full enjoyment of the freedom of religion in the country (Italy); 109.107. Continue its policy to establish an environment for constructive dialogue and trust between the different religions in the country (Morocco); 109.108. Continue its efforts in eradicating poverty, with a focus to addressing the issue of inadequate housing affecting minority groups in the country (Malaysia); 109.109. Actively support the promotion and universal implementation of the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation in accordance with the recommendations made by the Human Rights Council in its various resolutions on this issue (Spain); 109.110. Increase the annual budget allocations for health section in order to provide for quality healthcare as well as adequate education, training and salaries for medical and paramedical staff (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 109.111. Adopt a national strategy on sexual and reproductive health and rights (Netherlands); 109.112. Provide comprehensive and age-appropriate sexuality education, including on prevention of unwanted pregnancies (Slovenia); 109.113. Implement comprehensive awareness raising strategies for hospital staff, administrators and other health professionals regarding their responsibilities to register births and facilitate the issuance of birth certificates, without any delay (Uruguay); 109.114. Intensify efforts to address the underlying causes of mortality and malnutrition among children in the first years of life, including aspects related to the lack of access to health care services, poverty and the low level of education among Roma families and families living in rural areas. Also strengthen prenatal and postnatal services, implementing additional programs on maternal breastfeeding and hygiene for the development and survival in early childhood (Uruguay); 109.115. Ensure that all children complete their 10-year compulsory education by taking concrete action to address reasons behind school non-attendance and by providing effective sanctions for those who obstruct children from attending schools (Czech Republic); 109.116. Continue to fully implement the 2011 National Education Law and provide training for a sufficient number of teachers for education in or of minority languages (Hungary); 109.117. Allocate adequate financial resources for education in the State Budget as provided for by the Law on Education 2011 (Timor-Leste); 109.118. Establish appropriate policies in order to make the right to education for all a priority (Burundi); 109.119. Take effective measures to remove the obstacles for vulnerable children to accede to quality education (Italy); 109.120. Continue making efforts to realize the right to education of children, particularly those from remote rural areas (Peru); 109.121. Continue its policy to ensure equality in the area of education, and particularly targeting Roma children (Indonesia); 109.122. Continue its efforts related to human rights education and training as it represents a major gateway onto overcoming many long term difficulties (Lebanon); 109.123. Continue its efforts with a view to the effective implementation of the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Education and Training (Morocco); 109.124. Introduce the principle of anti-discrimination into school curricula and teaching practices at all levels of its education system (Cyprus); 109.125. Facilitate the greater integration and participation in society of people with disabilities and, in particular, implement a more expansive sheltered housing strategy with measurable targets that will achieve a substantial reduction in the number of people with disabilities currently in institutional care (Ireland); 109.126. Intensify efforts in the promotion of the rights of persons with disabilities (Greece); 109.127. Strengthen the different measures aiming at respecting rights of persons with disabilities, particularly boys and girls (Argentina); 109.128. Increase efforts to ensure the inclusion of children with disabilities in society, with special emphasis on access to education (Mexico); 109.129. Take necessary measures to the effective implementation of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, with due regard to the disabled children experiencing discrimination in accessing mainstream education (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 109.130. Enact legislation to ensure the unhindered participation of persons with disabilities in the education system and in the labour market (Austria); 109.131. Ensure unhindered access of children with disabilities to quality and inclusive education (Slovakia); 109.132. Continue to empower the Roma minority and provide them with a greater role in society (Kuwait); 109.133. Continue the efforts to implement the Strategy of the Government of Romania for the inclusion of the Romanian citizens belonging to the Roma minority for the period 2012-2020 (Algeria); 109.134. Set measurable objectives and allocate the necessary resources to ensure the effective implementation of the national Roma integration strategy, including with respect to existing initiatives in the various regions aimed at preventing the segregation of Roma children in schools (Canada); 109.135. Ensure that its National Strategy for Roma Integration is implemented in full to enable the Roma community to better integrate into society, giving them greater access to public amenities, healthcare and public housing (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 109.136. Effectively implement the Strategy for the inclusion of the Romanian citizens belonging to the Roma minority for the period 2012-2020 and make further efforts in guaranteeing the rights of the Roma in education, employment, housing and cultural fields (China); 109.137. Implement the government’s National Roma Strategy with appropriate funding to improve education, housing and employment opportunities for Roma citizens (United States of America); 109.138. Ensure adequate financial resources, both from the national budget as well as through regional and international cooperation, for the implementation of the Strategy for the Inclusion of Romanian Belonging to Roma Minority (Timor-Leste); 109.139 Maintain and intensify its positive engagement towards the full inclusion of Roma people (Rwanda); 109.140. Continue pursuing sensitized policies designed for the integration and social inclusion of persons belonging to Romania’s Roma community (Slovakia); 109.141. Adopt additional measures for the protection of Roma. Provide Roma with conditions to receive full education and to have access to labour market and health services. Identify and suppress cases of discrimination against Roma, and their forced displacement and segregation. Make efforts to decrease the high level of intolerance towards Roma in the Romanian society (Russian Federation); 109.142. Take special measures to guarantee Roma children equal access to inclusive quality education and ensure full participation of the Roma themselves in these efforts (Finland); 109.143. Intensify its efforts to increase school attendance of the Roma children and to effectively implement the national strategy by correlating it with specific programs and by strengthening the implementation structures for the Roma at local level (Sweden); 109.144. Implement an expanded social and voluntary housing programme for Roma families, and in this regard, enhance collaboration with civil society and full participation of all relevant stakeholders (Ireland); 109.145. Continue to take measures aiming at improving the situation of its citizens of the Roma origin and continue to improve the framework of combating discrimination against them (Iraq); 109.146. Continue conducting more awareness and sensitizations programmes regarding minority groups with the aim to changing the stereotype and negative perception of these groups in the long run (Malaysia); 109.147. Establish effective ways that all migrant workers and their families could lodge complaints for violation of their rights without fear of reprisal (Mexico); 109.148. Continue efforts to protect all migrant workers and their families, ensuring that abusive employers are held accountable and brought to justice (Sri Lanka); 109.149. Consider amending the Citizenship Law to include safeguards against statelessness, providing that children born in the Romanian territory, who would otherwise be stateless, acquire Romanian nationality (Slovakia); 109.150. Further strengthen measures to ensure rights of migrants (Bangladesh); 109.151. Accelerate the resolution of pending property cases by adopting the relevant new legislative framework (Hungary); 109.152. Accelerate its efforts to combat corruption in the country including through the effective implementation of the new National Anticorruption Strategy 2012-2015 (Indonesia); 109.153. Combat corruption; ensure the independence of the judiciary. Take steps to increase the effectiveness of the judiciary and prosecutor’s office, and the level of professionalism of their staff (Russian Federation); 109.154. Through the national strategy against corruption 2012-2015, take the measures necessary to ensure the implementation of the recommendations relating the cooperation and verification mechanism (CVM) issued by the European Commission, and including continuing efforts to prevent and combat corruption in the political and judicial sectors (Canada); 109.155. Conduct an independent, impartial, thorough and effective investigation into cooperation with the American authorities regarding illegal renditions and secret prisons in the context of the fight against terrorism (Switzerland); 109.156. Investigate and publish the findings on the State’s participation in the rendition and secret detention programmes of CIA, in particularly, on the presumed existence of secret detention centres on the national territory (France); 109.157. Conduct, jointly with Special Procedures of the Human Rights Council, comprehensive and transparent investigations regarding information/reports on participation of the Romanian authorities in CIA secret programs of arbitrary detention and secret transfers of suspects (Belarus); 110. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English only]   Composition of the delegation  The Delegation of Romania was headed by the Secretary of State, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Bogdan Aurescu and composed of the following members: • Ambassador Maria Ciobanu, Permanent Representative of Romania to the UN in Geneva; • Ms. Oana Rogoveanu, Director, Directorate for Human Rights, Protection of Minorities and Council of Europe, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Razvan Rotundu, Minister Counselor, Permanent Mission of Romania to the UN in Geneva; • Ms. Livia-Cristina Puscaragiu, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of Romania to the UN in Geneva; • Ms. Ioana Cristea, Second Secretary, Directorate for Human Rights, Protection of Minorities and Council of Europe, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Adrian George Petrescu, Chief of Unit on Monitoring, Assessment and Victim Coordination, National Agency for Combating the Trafficking of Persons; • Ms Irena Apolzan, Deputy Commissioner of Police, General Department for European Affairs and International Relations, Ministry of Interior; • Mr. Cosmin Stan, Major, Expert Officer, Unit for European Affairs, International Relations and Schengen, General Inspectorate of the Romanian Gendarmerie; • Mr. Marian Florescu, Police Inspector, Department for European Affairs, Programs and International Relations, General Inspectorate of the Romanian Gendarmerie; • Mr. Florin Fleican, Inspector, General Department on Teaching in the Languages of Minorities, Ministry of National Education; • Ms Olivia Rusandu, Public Manager, General Department on Social Assistance, Ministry of Labour, Family, Social Protection and Elderly.     