  United Nations  A/HRC/24/14     General Assembly  Distr.: General 8 July 2013  Original: English  Human Rights Council Twenty-fourth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   Russian Federation Contents  Paragraphes Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–139 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–20 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  21–139 5  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  140–142 14  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  28 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its sixteenth session from 22 April to 3 May 2013. The review of the Russian Federation was held at the 12th meeting on 29 April 2013. The delegation of the Russian Federation was headed by the Minster of Justice, Alexander Konovalov. At its 18th meeting, held on 3 May 2013, the Working Group adopted the report on the Russian Federation. 2. On 14 January 2013, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of the Russian Federation: Argentina, Benin, Switzerland. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of the Russian Federation:  (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/RUS/1);  (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/RUS/2);  (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/RUS/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by the Czech Republic, Germany, Kyrgyzstan, the Netherlands, Norway, Mexico, Sri Lanka, Slovenia and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to the Russian Federation through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR).  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation stated that the recommendations of the first cycle of the UPR had become additional guarantees for increasing observance of human rights and the effectiveness of the mechanisms for their protection. 6. The delegation stated that significant measures had been taken to ensure the implementation of human rights guarantees and principles enshrined in the Constitution. The main achievements and impediments to the realization of human rights had been mentioned in the national report, prepared in cooperation with civil society. 7. As indicated in the national report, the democratization of State institutions and increasing civil society participation in decision-making had remained a priority. The delegation explained that, as of 2012, all federal executive bodies had been required by law to publish information on draft normative acts and to carry out public discussion on them, including with the participation of the public councils which included representatives of civil society. Furthermore, the Government had approved a concept regarding a new mechanism envisaged for public submission of legislative proposals by citizens through the Internet for their subsequent consideration by the Government. 8. The mechanism for law enforcement monitoring had operated over the past three years. It provided for broad participation of civil society in the evaluation of the effectiveness of legislation, as well as in the analysis of the need for legal amendments. Over the past four years the civil society institutions had been able to independently evaluate legislation. 9. The concept of open government provided many opportunities for the active involvement of civil society in the process of oversight over the Government’s activities. The posts of Ombudspersons for children’s rights and the rights of entrepreneurs had been set up alongside the Commissioner for Human Rights (Ombudsman) and the Council on the Development of Civil Society and Human Rights. 10. The Government continued administrative reforms aimed at increasing access to government services and limiting the competences of specific public officials, including those leading to arbitrary decisions and human rights violations. 11. The procedures for creating and registering non-commercial organizations had been simplified and their periodic reporting had been brought down to a minimum. The registration requirements of political parties had also been revised and simplified. More than 60 political parties had been registered and their number had been constantly growing. 12. Video broadcasting from more than 90,000 polling stations was introduced through the Internet during the 2012 presidential elections to ensure transparency of the voting process, which would continue to operate for all subsequent elections. 13. While some difficulties remained in the army, the penitentiary system and some social institutions, significant progress had been made. In particular, reforms in in the penitentiary system had started in 2009, such as revision of the criminal legislation, which shifted the focus towards alternative punishments to deprivation of liberty. As a result, the number of persons sentenced to imprisonment was decreased and the ratio between persons sentenced to imprisonment and alternative forms of punishments had also gone down from 3:1 to 2:3. 14. Another important area of the prison reform was to increase the guarantees of the rights of inmates, such as access to medical care, educational services, acquisition of professional skills and rehabilitation. The public oversight commissions, comprised of representatives of civil society, had regular access to all penitentiary institutions. 15. Significant measures were taken to eliminate corruption, including the amendment of relevant legislation. The authorities worked closely in this area with the relevant international and regional intergovernmental bodies. 16. The law-enforcement bodies had been reorganized, additional guarantees limiting their activities had been created and mechanisms for the eradication and prevention of all forms of torture and cruel treatment had been established. 17. Several measures had been undertaken to increase the independence of the courts and transparency of their proceedings. Any interested person could obtain information related to the functioning of the courts and to the proceedings of criminal and civil cases, subject to the data protection requirements. All court decisions had been published and were widely accessible. 18. In 2011 the possibility of determining the composition of the court through automated computer systems was provided, allowing for random selection of judges and thus minimizing the chances of appointing persons interested in the outcome of specific cases. Several draft laws had been initiated to suppress attempts by individuals or officials to influence court proceedings and decisions and to provide guarantees against abuse of power. Russia had been taking measures to bring its national judicial practices into compliance with the standards of the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR). 19. The law on free legal aid adopted in 2010 had broadened the guarantees of access to free legal advice in civil cases for the neediest sectors of the population. Free legal advice in criminal cases had always been provided without any limitations. 20. The delegation noted that the legacy of the past and various unfavourable factors inherited had continued to impair the realization of human rights. Systemic risks, such as arbitrariness of decisions taken by public and municipal officials, insufficient responsiveness and effectiveness of the courts, and the low level of public dialogue in society remained, and these had been taken into account in designing new measures.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 21. During the interactive dialogue, 102 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 22. Germany made recommendations. 23. Greece acknowledged the promotion of women’s rights, including the establishment of a working group to implement the recommendations of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), particularly regarding female political representation. It welcomed the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) and protection of vulnerable groups. 24. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela noted strengthened dialogue between public institutions and civil society, the newly enacted law on legal assistance, and increased pensions. 25. Cuba commended progress resulting from the implementation of recommendations accepted during the first cycle of the UPR. 26. Hungary asked whether United Nations-funded (non-governmental organizations) NGOs were considered to be foreign agents. It encouraged implementation of the recommendations of the Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers. 27. Iceland observed that legislation did not prohibit gender-based discrimination, despite prohibiting discrimination on other grounds. It expressed concern regarding reports of discrimination and violence against lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) persons. 28. India noted the creation of Commissioners for Children’s Rights, legislation on legal assistance, and procedural safeguards legislation. It encouraged ongoing judicial reform, promotion of freedom of religious belief and the prevention of violence. 29. Indonesia commended the adoption of the national strategy for action in children’s interests. It acknowledged improved economic, social and cultural rights, and an increase in the minimum wage, leading to a decline in poverty. 30. The Islamic Republic of Iran welcomed the delegation of the Russian Federation and noted investment in health and education, which had led to improved quality of life. Active participation in the UPR demonstrated commitment to human rights. 31. Iraq welcomed implementation of measures resulting from the previous cycle of the UPR, including judicial reform, protection of the right to education of persons with disabilities and efforts to combat terrorism. 32. Ireland commended accession to regional and international legal instruments. It was concerned at legislative amendments on the definition of treason and a requirement for certain NGOs to register as “foreign agents”. 33. Italy welcomed the support of the Russian Federation for the General Assembly resolutions on a moratorium on the use of the death penalty. Italy expressed concern about the application of the “combating extremism” law and the 2012 legislation on foreign-funded organizations. 34. Japan welcomed the ratification of CRPD. Japan asked about legal and institutional reform to strengthen judicial independence; and how the “Foreign Agents Registration Act” would be implemented without restricting human rights groups. 35. Jordan welcomed the ratification of several international instruments and efforts to strengthen human rights institutions, including the appointment of commissioners for children’s rights in the Office of the President. 36. Kazakhstan applauded protection of rights by prohibiting discrimination and promoting inter-ethnic relations. It called for improved compliance with international obligations. 37. Kuwait welcomed measures undertaken within the UPR framework. It noted the progress indicated in the national report, particularly the ratification of international conventions and protocols. 38. Kyrgyzstan noted the strengthened institutional framework, including a unit to investigate cases of torture. Despite legal measures, hate crimes continued. 39. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic, noting the democratic structure of Government, welcomed efforts to strengthen the institutional framework, including through the ratification and implementation of international instruments, which should continue. 40. Latvia expressed serious concern regarding disproportionate restrictions imposed on NGOs, which represented a step backward in civil and political rights. 41. Lebanon highlighted the role of the Russian Federation in the mechanisms of the Human Rights Council, including the UPR, implementation of previous recommendations and efforts to strengthen national human rights institutions. 42. Malaysia commended ratification of international instruments, efforts to improve inter-ethnic relations, criminal legislation, decision-making processes for civil society, and the national strategy for social security. 43. Mauritania encouraged the Russian Federation to continue to improve its legal systems. It applauded the Government’s cooperation with Human Rights Council mechanisms. 44. Mexico noted the ratification of CRPD and legislation against trafficking and racial discrimination. It urged continued cooperation with United Nations special procedures. 45. Montenegro asked whether legislation was being adopted to criminalize domestic violence, pursuant to the recommendation by the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR) and encouraged the country to do so. It welcomed ratification of CRPD and signing of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (OP-CRC-SC), encouraging its ratification. 46. Morocco asked about specific measures to combat corruption and to ensure the effectiveness of the judiciary. 47. Myanmar commended development of internal human rights structures and continued strengthening of human rights institutions. 48. Namibia commended ratification of CRPD and signature of OP-CRC-SC. It noted the extension of the moratorium on the death penalty. 49. Nepal welcomed continued combating of human trafficking and efforts to ensure rights for families, children and women, the right to education and the rights of indigenous people. 50. The Netherlands raised the question of the LGBT community and legislation restricting freedoms of expression and assembly, and the issue of harassment of NGOs, journalists and human rights defenders. 51. Nicaragua noted legislative and institutional reforms and improved administration of justice. It welcomed the appointment of the Commissioner for the Rights of the Child and the National Action Plan for Children. 52. Nigeria commended progress made in promoting and protecting human rights. 53. Norway, while commending simplified procedures for registering political parties, expressed concern over human rights defenders and at laws on restricting NGOs, and on treason and extremism. 54. The delegation stated that the amendments made in June 2012 to the Federal Act on assemblies, rallies, demonstrations, marches and picketing increased responsibility for the violations committed in this sphere. Not a single provision set forth in this Act, however, would be comparatively stricter than measures provided for in similar laws of other countries. Some provisions of this Act would be subjected to additional clarifications further to the decision taken by the Constitutional Court in February 2013. For example, the minimum fines would be reduced and punishment in the form of mandatory work would be abolished. Some restrictions related to violations of public order, health and safety norms, and obstruction to movement of transport were consistent with the restrictions applied by other countries, and the validity of these restrictions has been confirmed by the Constitutional Court. 55. The “foreign agent” status of NGOs did not trigger any restrictions or sanctions for NGOs with this status. Sanctions could only be applied by the court and only when the provisions of the Act on the voluntary declaration of the “foreign agent” status were not being complied with. The purpose of introducing this status was to obtain information as to whether the organizations had foreign funding and had been involved in domestic politics. The delegation stated that the monitoring and checks which had been carried out by the Prosecutor’s Office had been among planned activities. 56. The Criminal Code ensures liability for obstructing the lawful professional activities of journalists either by preventing them from disseminating information or by forcing them to disclose sources. The sanction for a violation of this provision was increased in December 2011 to six years’ imprisonment. Criminal prosecution of journalists for their professional activities did not take place, but crimes against journalists and human rights activists unfortunately did occur. Crimes committed in relation to these persons’ professional activities were being dealt with by the Investigative Committee as a matter of priority. 57. With respect to the murder of Anna Politkoskaya, the delegation reported that one of the accomplices in the case had already been sentenced to long-term imprisonment. The murderers of Stanislav Markelov and Anastasia Baburova had also been sentenced. An international arrest warrant had been issued for the alleged perpetrator of murder of Natalya Estemirova. Measures had been taken to solve other crimes committed against journalists and human rights activists. 58. The right to freedom of expression is guaranteed by the Constitution and censorship was prohibited. Distribution of information that could cause damages should be limited in order to prevent terrorism, extremism, etc. Legal amendments had singled out three particularly dangerous types of information, namely, child pornography, instructions on how to produce drugs and information on ways to commit suicide. In March 2013, the list of information that could cause damages was supplemented by information on the children who had been victims of crimes. The Law provided for a number of steps in order for specific information to be deemed prohibited. Prohibitions related only to the specific types of information mentioned above and had no impact on freedom of expression or the use of the Internet. Filters had an important role to play as far as children’s access to the Internet was concerned. 59. There was no specific legislation regulating the Internet and this had been subject to general legal norms. The delegation highlighted that restrictions in this area had been introduced with the aim of countering terrorism, extremism and prevention of dissemination of dangerous information and the implementation thereof should be carried out in accordance with the law in order to make restrictions on freedom of expression unnecessary. 60. Regarding questions on restrictions on freedom of assembly and demonstrations, the delegation stated that legal reforms in this area had been completed and that the key objective of the legislation was to ensure balance between the realization of freedom of expression for all, including through public manifestation, and public order. 61. Pakistan welcomed the 2012 legislation providing for free legal assistance to citizens, establishment of Regional Commissioners for human rights and a Commissioner for children’s rights. It noted steps to comply with the Convention against Torture. 62. Paraguay noted results in protecting human rights, and protection of women and persons with disabilities. It noted evolution in due process and freedom of association. 63. The Philippines welcomed the signing of the Convention on the Legal Status of Migrant Workers from the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS States). It commended the establishment of the Commissioner for Children’s Rights and expressed confidence with regard to similar protection for women. 64. Poland noted the development of human rights infrastructure. It expressed concern at regulations requiring NGOs to register as foreign agents, and about reports of violence against women and human rights defenders. 65. The Republic of Korea highlighted significant steps taken to address racially motivated crime and improvements to ease the requirements for founding political parties. 66. Romania was concerned about restrictions on freedom of association and expression and alleged torture in detention. It hoped for the continued ratification of further international human rights instruments. 67. Rwanda welcomed the extension of the moratorium on the death penalty, action to combat trafficking in persons and reforms to the judicial system, including to prevent corruption. 68. Saudi Arabia welcomed the attachment of the Russian Federation to constructive engagement with international human rights mechanisms and acknowledged important steps taken in the field of human rights. 69. Senegal noted accession to a number of human rights instruments. It commended progress in reducing poverty. It also raised challenges. 70. Serbia noted ongoing efforts to improve the legal framework and the importance of adherence to CRPD and OP-CRC-SC. 71. Singapore noted achievements in combating trafficking in persons and highlighted cooperation with CIS States. It acknowledged judicial reforms to enhance the Courts’ ability to handle cases and improve public confidence. 72. Slovakia commended the Russian Federation’s ratification of CRPD, timely reporting to the treaty bodies and regular contribution to the OHCHR budget, and its signature of OP-CRC-SC. 73. Slovenia noted the implementation of a 1st cycle recommendation. It commended visits by some special procedures mandate holders and encouraged more. It noted efforts to improve tolerance but raised several concerns. 74. South Africa commended the signing of CRPD and OP-CRC-SC.  It welcomed steps to protect women’s rights and encouraged continued steps to combat poverty. 75. Spain commended the role of the Russian Federation on the Human Rights Council and welcomed its openness in recent years to visits from special procedures. 76. Sri Lanka welcomed strengthened efforts to protect children and women. It commended efforts to counter terrorism and extremism and noted intensified measures to combat human trafficking. 77. The State of Palestine commended accession to many international human rights instruments and strengthened action to combat human trafficking. It urged the continued combating of hate crimes and racially motivated aggression. 78. The Sudan emphasized the 2012 ratification of CRPD and noted improved protection of the rights of persons with disabilities, particularly in the field of education. 79. Sweden raised concern over discrimination against LGBT individuals and the recent draft law. It expressed concern over the July 2012 amendment to the law on non-commercial organizations. 80. Switzerland expressed concern over the pressure exerted upon national and international NGOs. It commended the signature of the Rome Statute. 81. The Syrian Arab Republic commended the Russian Federation for enhancing the rights of its people through implementation of important recommendations, particularly regarding right to life and security. It encouraged additional efforts in cooperation with civil society to achieve social justice and development. 82. Tajikistan noted the enhancement of human rights institutions and welcomed steps to strengthen policy to prevent torture and violence and to improve education. 83. Thailand welcomed the ratification of CRPD and improved education for children with special needs. It welcomed measures to improve the situation of women detainees and remand facilities. 84. The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia commended the ratification of CRPD. It also commended the extension of the moratorium on the death penalty and expressed hope for its definitive abolition. 85. Tunisia noted efforts to combat racist violence and encouraged enhanced efforts against discrimination and intolerance. It encouraged the adoption of legislation to combat violence against women. 86. Turkmenistan welcomed the update on the efforts undertaken by the Russian Federation to improve human rights. 87. Ukraine welcomed establishment of an ombudsman for children and for the rights of entrepreneurs. It noted the need to uphold the rights of ethnic minorities. 88. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland expressed concern over legislative steps to control civil society, the expanded definition of treason and resulting intimidation. It urged effective investigation of allegations of human rights violations. 89. The United States of America commended improved accessibility for persons with disabilities. It expressed concern over laws restricting civil society and freedom of expression. 90. Uruguay noted ratifications of international instruments and cooperation with the universal human rights system. 91. Uzbekistan noted the willingness of the Russian Federation to cooperate further with international human rights mechanisms, including the UPR process. 92. Guatemala welcomed ratifications to CRPD and OP-CRC-SC. It referred to the HR Committee’s concerns over increasing hate crimes, racially motivated attacks against ethnic and religious minorities and manifestations of racism and xenophobia. 93. Viet Nam encouraged the Russian Federation to continue strengthening the democratic, federative and law-based State with a republican form of government and constituent entities with equal rights as well as streamline and harmonize domestic legislation with international obligations for furthering the rights for vulnerable groups, such as women, children, the elderly and migrants, with a greater focus on education, health care and social welfare (Viet Nam); 94. Zimbabwe commended ratification of CRPD and the signing of an OP-CRC, and for the hosting of visits by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and two Special Rapporteurs. 95. In response to questions on the judiciary, the delegation stated that the authorities had been constantly improving the legislation, ensuring independence of judges and the right to a fair trial. Considerable progress had been achieved: some laws had been adopted or amended; compensation to citizens for violation of their right to the prompt administration of justice had been provided; and a reform of the civil and criminal appeal bodies had been undertaken. As a result of the reform in criminal procedures, a reduction of the number of persons in pretrial detention had been recorded. The perception and trust of citizens towards the judicial system had been improved. 96. Regarding questions on prevention of torture and ill treatment of detainees, the delegation explained that the legislation provided guarantees for freedom from torture and that the definition of torture was in line with CAT. The Government had been taking measures to combat torture: a large number of complaints had been investigated and perpetrators had been punished. 97. Training for law enforcement agencies had been conducted on the basis of a specially designed curriculum, which incorporated the case law of ECHR. Recommendations and conclusions of international human rights mechanisms had been disseminated through the website of the Ministry of Justice. 98. The provisions of CRPD had been implemented in a number of areas, including inclusive education, employment opportunities and access of persons with disabilities to public infrastructure through adoption of new laws. Sign language had been recognized as an official language of communication in public services. 99. Gender equality had been given a high priority. Equal rights had been enshrined in the Constitution and legislation. The statistics documented a high employment rate for women, including in high-level decision-making positions in the public and private spheres. 100. Afghanistan noted with appreciation judicial reforms and the ratification of a number of international instruments since the first UPR cycle. 101. Algeria welcomed institutional and legislative reforms and efforts to ensure equal enjoyment of human rights, notably through strengthened human rights institutions and the establishment of human rights commissioners. 102. Angola commended the ratification of regional and international human rights instruments and the adoption of measures to ensure respect by the security forces for human rights and fundamental freedoms, to counter human trafficking and to promote gender issues. 103. Argentina praised the ratification of CRPD and the establishment of the Council for Coordination on Gender Issues. 104. Armenia noted legislative and administrative steps taken to enhance human rights, accession to several international human rights instruments and the cultural diversity prevalent in Russia. 105. Australia remained concerned by allegations of human rights abuses in the North Caucasus, at the protection afforded to whistle-blowers and civil rights restrictions on persons critical of the Government. 106. The Czech Republic was concerned about the continued harassment of human rights defenders and journalists and practices and amendments to legislation restricting NGOs. 107. Azerbaijan noted the ratification of international human rights instruments and cooperation with the United Nations special rapporteurs. It valued efforts in upholding children’s rights and combating violence against women. 108. Bangladesh commended the ratification of CRPD and action taken to guarantee the right to preserve traditions and culture and to protect the family and children. 109. Belarus welcomed the progress made since the 1st cycle of the UPR as well as the Russian Federation’s cooperation with the United Nations human rights mechanisms. It also welcomed the Russian Federation’s financial support to OHCHR and its role in ensuring the elimination of double standards in Human Rights Council work. 110. Belgium expressed concern about non-governmental organizations and the rights of LGBT persons. It asked what steps were envisaged to prevent new legislation from imposing financial or administrative obstacles on NGOs. 111. Benin welcomed legislative reforms and endeavours to bring prison conditions into line with international standards. It encouraged the imposition of penalties provided for in the Criminal Code to protect women against violence and efforts to provide adequate housing. 112. The Plurinational State of Bolivia welcomed efforts to promote and protect the rights of children and the family, the rights to social security and to education for persons with disabilities, and the ratification of international human rights instruments. 113. Bosnia and Herzegovina commended measures to enhance social security and welfare, ratification of key international instruments, judicial, administrative and institutional reforms. It encouraged the Russian Federation to further enhance its engagements and commitment to protect human rights. 114. Botswana noted efforts to ratify outstanding human rights treaties and the entry into force of legislation on free legal aid. 115. Brazil welcomed the ratification of CRPD and increased openness to the Human Rights Council special procedures. It invited the Russian Federation to consider abolition of the death penalty. 116. Bulgaria appreciated efforts to reform the national human rights machinery and steps taken to improve prison conditions, and refine legislation and judicial practice in imposing prison sentences. 117. Burkina Faso welcomed ratification of international human rights instruments, efforts to combat terrorism and extremism, cooperation with special procedures, improvements of some prison conditions and attention given to violence against women, ethnic minorities and the rights of persons with disabilities. 118. Burundi commended the Russian Federation on the adoption of free legal aid legislation, and the commitment to combating terrorism and extremism, protecting children’s rights and guaranteeing sustainable development for indigenous peoples. 119. Cambodia noted progress made in implementing previous recommendations, particularly the ratification of international human rights instruments. It appreciated steps taken in continuing to observe a moratorium on the death penalty. 120. Canada asked what steps were being taken to empower civil society actors in the region and foster a positive climate for their efforts. 121. Chad welcomed the strengthening of the legal and institutional human rights framework and ratification of core international human rights instruments. 122. Chile sought the Government’s opinion on the concern shown by CAT at the scope of the amended definition of the crime of treason and the recommendation on its repeal. It welcomed the law on free legal aid, reduction of poverty, the action plan for children 2012-2017 and ratification of CRPD. 123. China welcomed the ratification of CRPD and progress in judicial reform, generating employment, combating violence against women and protecting the rights of children, persons with disabilities, ethnic minorities and indigenous peoples. 124. Costa Rica was concerned by allegations of secret detentions and enforced disappearances in the Caucasus, increasing attacks, threats and violence against human rights defenders, journalists and lawyers, and restrictions on the freedom of expression. It welcomed the broader procedural guarantees, measures to avoid police abuse and the moratorium on the death penalty. 125. Cyprus welcomed the ratification of international human rights instruments and steps taken to combat domestic violence and human trafficking. It encouraged the adoption of a comprehensive strategy and legislation to prevent domestic violence. 126. Austria expressed concern at laws continuing to unduly restrict activities of civil society and at specific recently adopted laws further curtailing civil liberties regarding assembly, the internet, the so-called “propaganda of homosexuality” and foreign agents laws, and the crimes of treason and espionage. 127. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea commended the Government’s consistent efforts for the protection and promotion of human rights and the considerable progress achieved. 128. Denmark was concerned that the situation of indigenous peoples had not sufficiently improved regarding land rights, food, education, health and work, and at the proposed federal bill outlawing the so-called “propaganda of homosexuality” among minors. 129. Ecuador welcomed the ratification of international human rights instruments to protect the rights of children and persons with disabilities, and civil and political rights, and the achievements of the Russian Federation in combating human trafficking and corruption. 130. Egypt commended, inter alia, the ratification of CRPD and the ongoing judicial reform and invited the Russian Federation to share its future plans on combating racial and religious hatred. 131. Estonia, while acknowledging progress in some aspects compared to the previous UPR in 2009, still noted some deficiencies. 132. Ethiopia commended measures to fight discrimination against minority groups and migrants, and awareness-raising on discrimination-related problems. It requested further information on measures taken to combat discrimination. 133. Finland commended the drafting of a federal bill on preventing domestic violence. It was concerned about the recent developments on freedom of association, which jeopardize the operation and participation possibilities of NGOs. 134. France welcomed the ratification of CRPD and OP-CRC-SC. 135. Georgia expressed concerns about the deliberate disregard and systematic failure by Russia, as an occupying power of the Georgian regions of Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region, to comply with its obligations under international humanitarian law and human rights law. Georgia made recommendations. 136. The delegation thanked the United Nations Member States for their questions and recommendations as well as for recognizing the progress achieved in many areas. The efforts regarding a number of recommendations had already been commented upon. 137. The delegation stated that while they considered that many of those recommendations and questions played an important role in achieving further progress, at the same time, issues raised in these should be made on the basis of reliable information.  There had been cases when the Government’s efforts to prosecute and punish human rights violations had been intentionally presented as harassment or political repression. Such interpretation cast doubt on the work of the judiciary. 138. The delegation stated that the authorities tried to reach a balance between the interests of individuals and the interest of society in general. The Government also considered it its duty to take measures to address threats of terrorism and extremism and to uphold the rights of individuals while ensuring safety for everyone. 139. The delegation stated that the Government would take its position on the recommendations formulated in the Working Group’s report after careful study. The delegation expressed the authorities’ commitment to continue to cooperate with the United Nations and to carry out effective work on behalf of human rights protection.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**   ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 140. The following recommendations will be examined by the Russian Federation, which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the 24th session of the Human Rights Council in September 2013: 140.1. Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearances (CPED) (Japan); 140.2. Sign and ratify CPED and the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (OP-CAT) (Germany); 140.3. Ratify OP-CAT and take necessary measures to ensure its full implementation (Switzerland); 140.4. Consider ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR-OP2) and take steps towards a “de jure” abolition of the death penalty (Italy); 140.5. Accede to ICCPR-OP2, aimed at abolishing the death penalty, and formalizing the de facto moratorium on the death penalty (Montenegro); 140.6. Consider the ratification of ICCPR-OP2 aiming at the abolition of the death penalty and of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC) (Romania); 140.7. Ratify OP-CRC-SC (Namibia) (Estonia); 140.8. Ratify OP-CRC-SC and sign and ratify OP-CRC-IC (Slovakia); 140.9. Consider ratifying the two remaining Optional Protocols to CRC to further ensure children’s rights (Thailand); 140.10. Ratify the Optional Protocol to CRPD (The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia); 140.11. Consider ratifying acceding to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families ICRMW (Philippines); acceding to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families ICRMW (Egypt); 140.12. Envisage ratifying CPED, OP-CAT and the Rome Statute of ICC (Tunisia); 140.13. Ratify the Rome Statute of ICC and OP-CAT (Costa Rica); 140.14. Ratify the Rome Statute of ICC, the Conventions regarding stateless persons and OP-CAT (Austria); 140.15. Consider the ratification of ILO Convention No. 169 (1989) on Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 140.16. Ratify the Rome Statute of ICC (Guatemala); 140.17. Ratify the Rome Statute and take necessary measures to ensure its full implementation (Switzerland); 140.18. Ratify the Rome Statute of ICC and fully align legislation with all the obligations under the Rome Statute (Latvia); 140.19. Consider the possibility of ratifying the Rome Statute of ICC, and fully harmonize its domestic legislation accordingly (Uruguay); 140.20. Ratify the Rome Statute of ICC and the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of ICC and to fully align its national legislation with all the obligations under the Statute (Estonia); 140.21. Consider the possibility of ratifying CPED, OP-CAT, ICRMW, ICCPR-OP2, the Rome Statute of ICC and the Conventions on Statelessness (Argentina); 140.22. Continue the accession process to the core human rights treaties (Azerbaijan); 140.23. Ratify the Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence (Finland); 140.24. Work on rights-related legislation with its Constitutional Court and Human Rights Commissioner to ensure legislation aligns with Russia’s international obligations (Australia); 140.25. Consider revising the current legislation on “combating extremism” so as to define precisely the crime of extremism and apply it only in relevant cases in full compliance with international obligations (Italy); 140.26. Amend the law “On counteracting extremist activities” to define extremism in terms of actual use of violence (United States of America); 140.27. Continue efforts aimed at the humanization of criminal and criminal procedure legislation (Bulgaria); 140.28. Intensify efforts in improving and strengthening its human rights institutions (Nigeria); 140.29. Continue measures to strengthen national institutions for the protection and promotion of human rights and freedoms (Uzbekistan); 140.30. Expand the activity of the Commissioner for the Rights of Child (Tajikistan); 140.31. Further strengthen the legal and policy frameworks for the protection of the rights of women, children, persons with disabilities and elderly persons (Ethiopia); 140.32. Develop, in close cooperation with civil society, a concept to increase the knowledge and awareness in society, and in particular within State institutions, about human rights obligations of the State and rights of the people (Germany); 140.33. Continue facilitating positive activities by youth associations, including voluntary work (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 140.34. Share its progressive experience in the promotion of peace and inter-ethnic harmony (Cuba); 140.35. Encourage racial, ethnic and religious tolerance, especially among youth (Pakistan); Encourage racial, ethnic and religious tolerance, especially among young people (Turkmenistan); 140.36. Continue its efforts to consolidate relations amongst the different ethnic groups in Russia (Saudi Arabia); 140.37. Continue taking legislative and law enforcement measures aimed at the harmonization of inter-ethnic relations (Pakistan); 140.38. Carry out work on the promotion of racial, national and religious tolerance, especially among youth (Tajikistan); 140.39. Consider developing an interreligious dialogue mechanism with a view to promoting tolerance and respect on distinctive religious and cultural values of the different ethnic groups in the country (Malaysia); 140.40. Continue the policy of multiculturalism aimed to preserve cultural diversity in the country (Armenia); 140.41. Ensure further progress in the creation of a climate of tolerance towards cultural and racial diversity in the society with full participation and integration of people in the development of national and local policies that affect their interests (Cambodia); 140.42. Continue taking legislative and law enforcement measures aimed at the harmonization of inter-ethnic relations (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 140.43. Continue its measures with regard to the promotion and protection of children’s rights and combating violence against women (Azerbaijan); 140.44. Keep on taking efforts in favour of the promotion and protection of the rights of women and children (Senegal); 140.45. Further promote children’s interests in the framework of the national strategy for action covering the period of 2012-2017 (Myanmar); 140.46. Continue working on children’s rights taking into account its international obligations on this area (Nicaragua); 140.47. Continue with plans aiming at the protection of the rights of the child, particularly those regarding to live and grow in a family (Saudi Arabia); 140.48. Continue its positive measures, including through developing activities of the Ombudsman on the Rights of the Child (Indonesia); 140.49. Maintain and strengthen its initiatives on the promotion and protection of the rights of the child particularly with regard to children with disabilities (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 140.50. Continue and enhance its efforts to ensure that all people, particularly those vulnerable groups are benefited from the measures to fulfil the economic, social and cultural rights, including a rise in the minimum wage (Indonesia); 140.51.  Protect the rights of the vulnerable groups of the population, such as women, children, persons with disabilities and elderly persons (Afghanistan); 140.52. Continue efforts to promote the rights of the vulnerable and marginalized groups in the country (Nepal); 140.53. Carry on its efforts to protect the rights of vulnerable groups including children and persons with disabilities (Greece); 140.54. Take further measures to better protect the rights of women, children, persons with disabilities and older persons (China); 140.55. Work on strengthening international cooperation in the field of human rights (Cuba); 140.56. Continue the policy of expanding opportunities in the existing legislation and mechanisms of influence of civil society in decision-making process (Kazakhstan); 140.57. Continue policies aimed at intensifying the fight against all forms of corruption (Kazakhstan); 140.58. Continue its efforts to intensify the fight against all forms of corruption (Morocco); 140.59. Encourage openness and transparency in the functioning of the public bodies (Kyrgyzstan); 140.60. Give continuity to legislative and institutional reforms for the promotion and protection of human rights (Nepal); 140.61. Actively engage with public councils under the State bodies while developing measures aimed at ensuring human rights in a more comprehensive manner (Sri Lanka); 140.62. Continue to play its important role in the field of protecting and promoting human rights (Sudan); 140.63. Continue efforts to broaden the scope of the protection of human rights and the safety of citizens in the country, as a means of enhancing social justice (Syrian Arab Republic); 140.64. Continue its active participation in international human rights cooperation and carry out more international technical assistance programmes in human rights (China); 140.65. Extend a standing invitation to all thematic special procedures (Montenegro); 140.66. Extend a standing invitation to special procedures (Guatemala); 140.67. Invite the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders to visit (Norway); 140.68. Issue a standing invitation to all special procedures mandate holders and respond positively to requests for their visits (Slovenia); 140.69. Issue a standing invitation to all United Nations Special Procedures and ratify OP-CAT and establish its national preventive mechanism accordingly (Czech Republic); 140.70. Present its standing invitation to the special procedures of the United Nations Human Rights Council (The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia); 140.71. Extend a standing invitation to the human rights special procedures and ratify the Rome Statute of ICC, OP-CAT and ILO Conventions nos. 169 and 189 (Paraguay); 140.72. Further the development of its interaction with the system of special rapporteurs, including through responding to their communications (Azerbaijan); 140.73. Continue active cooperation with the international human rights monitoring mechanisms, including treaty bodies and special procedures of the Human Rights Council (Afghanistan); 140.74. Work on strengthening international cooperation in the field of human rights (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 140.75. Introduce a definition of direct and indirect discrimination to prevent discrimination in specific spheres, such as those relating to women, children, migrants and indigenous peoples (Paraguay); 140.76. Amend its legislation so as to include an explicit provision on prohibition of discrimination based on gender and a specific provision on the definition of direct and indirect discrimination (Iceland); 140.77. Continue efforts in combating discrimination against women in all levels (Greece); 140.78. Take effective measures to prevent violence against women and prevent discrimination in employment on the grounds of gender (Iraq); 140.79. Continue adopting the necessary measures to eliminate wage discrimination at work between men and women (State of Palestine); 140.80. Improve the legislation and the activity of State institutions in combating discrimination, ethnic strife and different forms of extremism (Pakistan); 140.81. Intensify its efforts to combat all discrimination based on social, racial, ethnic, linguistic and religious grounds (Angola); 140.82. Effectively counter all forms of racism, xenophobia and intolerance (Uzbekistan); 140.83. Encourage high-level State officials and politicians to clearly take a position against racist and xenophobic political discourse (Tunisia); 140.84. Take all necessary measures to prevent violence and intolerance of a racist, xenophobia and homophobic character in conformity with international law and standards (Switzerland); 140.85. Continue efforts to address hate crimes and racially motivated attacks against ethnic and religious minorities, including racial profiling by law enforcement personnel (Botswana); 140.86. Repeal regional legislation that tolerates discrimination based on sexual orientation, and take concrete measures preventing from using regulations in force with discriminatory purposes against the rights of LGBT persons (Netherlands); 140.87. Bring existing regional and draft federal-level legislation related to homosexuality into conformity with its commitment to the principles of non-discrimination and take steps to ensure that the rights of all minorities, including gays and lesbians, are protected and respected (Canada); 140.88. Rescind regional laws and regulations which favour and tolerate discrimination based on sexual orientation, and refrain from adopting similar laws at the federal level, as well as take measures to prevent the arbitrary use of existing regulations against LGBT rights, including their rights to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly (Belgium); 140.89. Repeal regional laws and regulations which promote discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation, and abstain from passing similar legislation at the federal level (Denmark); 140.90. Repeal existing regional laws banning homosexual propaganda (Slovenia); 140.91. Introduce legislation prohibiting discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation and take measures to ensure that it is fully and effectively implemented (Sweden); 140.92. Reconsider the approval of the new provisions that can affect the rights of LGBT people, delinking homosexuality from pederasty, and in any case, avoid that the provisions be applied in a discriminatory form (Spain); 140.93. Take effective steps to prevent arbitrary use of existing regulations to discriminate against LGBT people, including their rights to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly (Denmark); 140.94. Prevent discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation and protect the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) people, including their right to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly (Norway); 140.95. Step up measures of protection against violence and discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation, particularly by enacting laws that prohibit such discrimination, and take measures to ensure the effective exercise of the rights to peaceful association and assembly of the LGBT community (Uruguay); 140.96. Take specific measures to ensure effective investigation of acts of violence against LGBT persons and hold the perpetrators to account (Iceland); 140.97. Adopt the necessary measures to eradicate the tendency and/or diffusion, through the media, and by public officials, of stereotypes that may promote discrimination against persons, based on their sexual orientation (Argentina); 140.98. Abolish the death penalty (Namibia); 140.99. Consider the abolition of the death penalty (Rwanda); 140.100. Adopt the necessary measures to proceed, as soon as possible, to abolishing the de jure death penalty and consider the possibility to adhere to ICCPR-OP2 (Uruguay); 140.101. Elucidate cases of enforced disappearances in the region of North Caucasus, and sign and ratify CPED (France); 140.102. Ending use of arbitrary detention, torture and excessive force by law enforcement officials (United States of America); 140.103. Take effective measures to prevent all acts of torture and ill treatment (Poland); 140.104. Adopt and implement a law prohibiting the use of confessions obtained under torture (France); 140.105. Take immediate steps to effectively eradicate and remedy widespread and systematic administrative practices of torture and ill-treatment, especially in detention facilities, suppression of the rights to assembly and freedom of expression, including media freedom and safety of journalists, and of control of judiciary by the executive in line with the United Nations treaty monitoring bodies’ recommendations (Georgia); 140.106. Further enhance the prevention of domestic violence (Myanmar); 140.107. Fast track the drafting of a federal bill on prevention of violence in the family (South Africa); 140.108. Continue its efforts to enact laws addressing domestic violence, especially against women (Philippines); 140.109. Adopt a comprehensive law on violence against women (Poland); 140.110. Consider the adoption of a comprehensive law and an action plan to combat violence against women (State of Palestine); 140.111. Strengthen all kinds of measures to combat violence against women and girls, inter alia, adoption of a broader law to criminalize all forms of violence against women (Uruguay); 140.112. Continue its efforts towards the total elimination of discrimination and violence against women (Rwanda); 140.113. Develop a comprehensive action plan to combat domestic violence against women and girls (Brazil); 140.114. Consider the approval of a general law on violence against women, in conformity with the recommendation made by CEDAW (Chile); 140.115. Continue its actions against domestic violence, especially when the victims are children and women, and fight effectively against human trafficking (Serbia); 140.116. Continue its efforts to further improve the situation on trafficking in persons and to enhance protection and support for the victims of trafficking (Singapore); 140.117. Further intensify efforts in order to prevent and eliminate human trafficking (Belarus); 140.118. Take further actions to combat trafficking in persons in accordance with the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols Thereto (Cambodia); 140.119. Continue its efforts in fighting against trafficking in persons, especially women and children (Egypt); 140.120. Pursue reforms of the Judiciary as well as its efforts to guarantee and facilitate access to justice for all its citizens (Morocco); 140.121. Continue efforts on judicial reform, ensuring meaningful, independent accountability mechanisms and improved transparency throughout the judicial process (Canada); 140.122. Establish an independent body responsible for the appointment, promotion, transfer and discharge of judges (Germany); 140.123. Guarantee the right to a fair trial by strengthening the independence of the Judiciary and by allowing detainees to freely consult a lawyer of their choice from upon arrest (France); 140.124. Continue with the reform of the judicial system by improving case-handling in the courts and the execution of judicial decisions in order to boost public confidence in the administration of justice (Nigeria); 140.125. Continue its reforms of the judicial system to improve the quality and efficiency of case handling in the courts (Rwanda); 140.126. Continue its efforts in strengthening its judicial system and the rule of law to enhance the protection of human rights of its people (Singapore); 140.127. Continue reforms in the system of the law enforcement agencies and the judicial system (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 140.128. Continue reforms for further liberalization and humanization of judicial-legal system (Uzbekistan); 140.129. Continue reforms in the system of the law-enforcement agencies and the judicial system (Kyrgyzstan) (Turkmenistan); 140.130. Continue its efforts in guaranteeing and facilitating access to justice for all citizens (Algeria); 140.131. Continue ensuring State safeguards to provide free legal aid to the population (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 140.132. Apply positive measures in order to ensure appropriate conditions for persons in detention, with involvement of public monitoring commissions (Kazakhstan); 140.133. Take positive measures towards guaranteeing appropriate conditions for people in detention including involvement of the system of public observer commissions that monitor penitentiary institutions (Jordan); 140.134. Consider incorporating the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-Custodial Measures for Women Offenders, otherwise known as the “Bangkok Rules”, as part of its programme to enhance the condition of detainees (Thailand); 140.135. Continue its positive efforts aimed at the reduction of the number of persons in penitentiary institutions (Jordan); 140.136. Pay specific attention to staff members’ education and human rights training of personnel of law-enforcement agencies, courts and investigating authorities (Sri Lanka); Pay priority attention to education and training in the area of human rights for staff of the law enforcement bodies, courts and investigative bodies (Tajikistan); 140.137. Enhance civilian control over investigation of violations in the army and ensure protection of witnesses and victims (Hungary); 140.138. Continue taking comprehensive and effective measures with a view to eradicating all forms of race-centred crimes (Republic of Korea); 140.139. Consider the possibility to put an end to the judicial proceeding initiated against the deceased Sergei Magnitsky, and reopen investigation on the causes of his death and on the fraud denounced (Spain); 140.140. Implement fully the judgments of ECHR, including any judgements related to officials accused of serious human rights violations in the North Caucasus (Australia); 140.141. Continue ongoing efforts in order to fully apply the constitutional protection regarding family and children (Lebanon); 140.142. Strengthen the policies against the existence of early marriages of girls and polygamy, as well as the laws fighting impunity (Paraguay); 140.143. Continue providing adequate and effective protection and support to the family, as the basic and natural unit of the society (Egypt); 140.144. Continue its efforts to further guarantee freedom of expression (Japan); 140.145. Fully ensure everyone’s right to exercise freedom of expression, including internet freedom, strengthen the dialogue with civil society and respect the rights of NGOs by eliminating all restrictive impediments (Estonia); 140.146. Review the legislation on defamation as a criminal offence so that these facts are examined in accordance with the Civil Code (Mexico); 140.147. Harmonize its domestic legislation with article 19 of ICCPR and modify the Penal Code in order to decriminalize defamation and bring defamation to the civil jurisdiction (Uruguay); 140.148. Pay particular attention to the issue of protecting journalists and those working for the mass media in order to ensure the freedom and the legitimacy of their activities (Algeria); 140.149. Intensify efforts to investigate cases of violence and intimidation against journalists and ensure that perpetrators are held to account (Austria); 140.150. Investigate thoroughly, promptly and impartially all allegations of intimidation and violence against journalists and human rights defenders and bring the perpetrators to justice (Ireland); 140.151. Remove legislative and other regulations which limit the legitimate exercise of the rights to freedom of expression, association and assembly and ensure that legislation is in accordance with the Russian Federation’s commitments and obligations under international law (Norway); 140.152. Take necessary measures to ensure that legal provisions do not create disproportionate restrictions to exercise freedom of assembly and expression (Latvia); 140.153. Review recent legislative changes with a view to fully ensuring freedom of assembly and association, in accordance with international obligations (Austria); 140.154. Adopt legislation assuring that LGBT people can freely exercise their rights to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly (Germany); 140.155. Rescind legislation that curbs the civil rights of Russia’s LGBTI community (Australia); 140.156. Continue its efforts to provide more freedom of action to civil society organizations and human rights activists so that they may continue to promote and protect human rights (Mauritania); 140.157. Ensure that all persons, including human rights defenders and members of civil society, can exercise their legitimate activities without fear of reprisals in conformity with international law and standards (Switzerland); 140.158. Put an end to all practices limiting activities of civil society, and take concrete steps to guarantee the freedom of association (Czech Republic); 140.159. Take measures to foster a safe, respectful, enabling environment for civil society, including through adopting laws and policies that support the rights to peaceful assembly, association, expression and information, and through promptly investigating and prosecuting attacks on journalists and members of civil society organizations (Canada); 140.160. That any sanctions for violations of freedom of assembly are proportionate and do not create undue obstacles to freedom of assembly (Hungary); 140.161. End the widespread practice of arresting participants at opposition rallies and pressing charges against them (Austria); 140.162. Revise laws on public assemblies according to the recommendations by the Venice Commission (Slovenia); 140.163. Consider removing any restriction on the freedom of association incompatible with its obligations under international law (Romania); 140.164. Intensify cooperation with the Council of Europe, in particular the Venice Commission, in properly implementing freedom of association and assembly (Austria); 140.165. Alleviate legislative and administrative barriers related to the functioning of NGOs and civil society, recognizing the legitimacy of their work and contribution for the society (Slovakia); 140.166. Continue efforts aimed at finding effective measures to protect human rights defenders (Botswana); 140.167. Ensure that all human rights defenders are able to conduct their work in line with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders (A/RES/53/144) (Poland); 140.168. Fully implement the provisions of the Human Rights Council’s resolution on “protecting human rights defenders” adopted in March 2013 (Norway); 140.169. In line with the resolution by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe adopted on 2 October 2012, amend the new law on NGOs so that it cannot be used as an instrument of repression and intimidation of NGOs and civil society (Sweden); 140.170. Ensure that the laws concerning non-governmental organizations do not impose undue obstacles for their functioning (Latvia); 140.171. Review its legislation regulating the functioning of NGOs, in particular the Federal Law on Non-Commercial Organizations, with a view to bringing it into accordance with international human rights law (Finland); 140.172. Rescind or soften the law “on the modification to certain laws of the Russian Federation on regulating the activities of non-commercial organizations which exercise function of foreign agents” (Belgium); 140.173. Consider and adequately address certain legislative and administrative measures which could negatively affect the legitimate activities of NGOs (Republic of Korea); 140.174. Reconsider legislation adopted on inspections and audits to NGOs (Spain); 140.175. Repeal the amendment which requires NGOs that accept foreign funding to register and identify themselves as “foreign agents”, as well as the amended definition of treason, and punish any harassment, intimidation or discrediting of civil society groups (Ireland); 140.176. Reconsider the legislation on NGOs that receive foreign funding in conformity with the international human rights standards and in light of the resolution on human rights defenders, as approved by the Human Rights Council at its 22th session (Chile); 140.177. Work with the Special Rapporteur on human rights defenders to ensure that their law governing NGOs guarantees effective implementation of the declaration on human rights defenders (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 140.178. Repeal provisions of the legislation regulating NGOs that require the registration of organizations receiving financial support from outside sources as “foreign agents” (Slovakia); 140.179. Revise the law on “foreign agents” and adopt measures in order to facilitate and enhance dialogue and practical cooperation between Government and civil society (Italy); 140.180. Review the law on demonstrations and the so-called law on “foreign agents”, in order to allow NGOs to freely carry out their activities in Russia (France); 140.181. Review legislation and registration according to which NGOs that accept foreign funding must register and identify themselves as “foreign agents” (Germany); 140.182. Take appropriate legislative measures to void the legislation requiring human rights organizations that receive foreign funding to register as “foreign agents” (Poland); 140.183. The removal of legislation that restricts civil society from receiving international funding, and cease unannounced inspections aimed at intimidating civil society organizations (United States of America); 140.184. Fully implement any judgment by the European Court of Human Rights regarding the “foreign agent” law (Australia); 140.185. Implement its legislation to protect whistle-blowers in a transparent, consistent and unbiased manner (Australia); 140.186. Investigate promptly, effectively and impartially all reports of attacks on or threats against human rights defenders, lawyers, journalists and civil society activists, and identify those responsible and bring them to justice (Norway); 140.187. Effectively investigate all cases of violence against human rights defenders, in order to hold the perpetrators accountable (Poland); 140.188. Expedite impartial investigation and provide them with sufficient means to elucidate aggressions against, or murders of, journalists, then bring the perpetrators of those crimes to justice (France); 140.189. Ensure due investigation and prosecution of all alleged attacks against human rights defenders and independent journalists (Slovakia); 140.190. Effectively and promptly investigate all reports of attacks or threats against human rights defenders and journalists and bring perpetrators to justice (Czech Republic); 140.191. Investigate all cases of aggressions or threats against human rights defenders, journalists, and civil society activists (Netherlands); 140.192. Investigate with due diligence any complaints filed by journalists and human rights defenders for harassment or repression based on their work or activity, and bring to justice and punish perpetrators, if any (Spain); 140.193. Implement the recommendations made by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights after the 2011 parliamentary and 2012 presidential elections (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 140.194. Continue its endeavours for effective protection of social and economic rights of its citizens (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 140.195. Continue its ongoing efforts to implement the Economic Development Strategy aimed at achieving social and economic reforms and improving the living conditions of the population (Kuwait); 140.196. Continue social measures to improve the well-being of those in most need, especially the elderly (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 140.197. Adopt a national strategy integrating economic, social and cultural rights to combat poverty (South Africa); 140.198. Strengthen the system of social insurance and the pension system (Turkmenistan); 140.199. Take further measures to strengthen the mechanisms for the protection of social rights, in particular rights of children, women and persons with disabilities (Uzbekistan); 140.200. Continue to vigorously pursue policies designed to enhance social security and welfare of its citizens to ensure a meaningful reduction in the number of people living on incomes below the absolute poverty threshold (Zimbabwe); 140.201. Enhance measures to ensure the human right to adequate housing, primarily for low-income population groups (Bangladesh); 140.202. Investigate allegations of abuses against workers of the Olympic Complex of Sochi (Costa Rica); 140.203. Continue its efforts to ensure free medical services of high quality for its population (Cuba); 140.204. Strengthen its programmes aimed at the promotion of the right to health (Brazil); 140.205. Continue increasing quality of children education, especially in rural areas (Turkmenistan); 140.206. Continue efforts for increasing quality of children’s education, especially in rural areas (Bangladesh); 140.207. Continue existing efforts in the field of human rights education and training (Lebanon); 140.208. Step up efforts to ensure human rights education and training for all (Slovenia); 140.209. Continue the promotion and protection of human rights through intensifying human rights education and enhancing public awareness (Armenia); 140.210. Put in place comprehensive and evidence-based sexual and reproductive health education programmes (Slovenia); 140.211. Further intensify the efforts to improve the system of education in the area of human rights and to strengthen the human rights culture (Uzbekistan); 140.212. Actively facilitate the ethno-cultural development in Russia (Cuba); 140.213. Continue its ongoing efforts to guarantee the rights of persons with disabilities (Kuwait); 140.214. Continue adapting health, education and transport services to the needs of persons with disabilities (Cuba); 140.215. Continue its efforts in protecting the rights of persons with disabilities and make its experience available in the framework of sharing best practices (Sudan); 140.216. Take measures to increase the coverage of persons with disabilities in the employment system, by creating barrier-free environments in favour of persons with disabilities, and effectively complying with its obligations in the framework of CRPD (Ecuador); 140.217. Ensure that its national legislation is in conformity with the obligation set in the article 27 of ICCPR with the objective of providing national minorities with the possibility to use their mother tongue without obstacles, as well as education in their mother tongue (Ukraine); 140.218. Strengthen measures to protect the rights of minorities (Ecuador); 140.219. Ensure the right of indigenous people to their ancestral lands through the implementation of the relevant legislation with measurable targets and effective data collection (Hungary); 140.220. Harmonize the various laws on the rights of indigenous peoples, particularly regarding their access to land and natural resources (Mexico); 140.221. Strengthen federal and local legislation in favour of the rights of indigenous peoples (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 140.222. Redouble efforts in paying special attention to school education of the indigenous peoples and national minorities (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 140.223. Officially endorse the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, and fully implement all relevant national laws and regulations (Denmark); 140.224. Improve the precarious situation of indigenous peoples, particularly by stepping up efforts to guarantee their right to education, including in their own languages; unrestricted use of their lands and territories; address the problem of underrepresentation in State institutions at the federal and regional levels and follow other principles enshrined in the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (Estonia); 140.225. Increase its budget allocation for indigenous peoples (Namibia); 140.226. Standardize the legal requirements for migrant workers, taking into account the time of residence, in particular with regard to the obligation to pass the exam of knowledge of the Russian language (Mexico); 140.227. Ensure respect of the rights of migrant workers and members of their families (Senegal); 140.228. Strengthen its system of protection of migrant workers and members of their families, by ratifying in particular the related international convention (Burkina Faso); 140.229. Take action to stop the atrocities committed by some individuals against immigrants, especially in Moscow (Chad); 140.230. Step up efforts in the field of international development assistance (Bangladesh); 140.231. Strengthen its measure to protect its citizens from terrorism and extremism (Syrian Arab Republic). *** 141. In the view of the Russian Federation, the recommendations in the footnote below are not relevant as they do not comply with the basis of the review stipulated in Human Rights Council Resolutions nos. 5/1 and 16/21. [reject]141.1 Immediately end the occupation of Georgia’s regions of Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region as an overarching method for numerous different forms of severe human rights violations therein (Georgia);   Allow and ensure safe and dignified return of ethnically cleansed IDPs and refugees from Georgia’s Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali regions and comply fully with respective norms of international humanitarian law and human rights law before and while ending the occupation of these regions (Georgia). 142. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole.  Annex [English only]   Composition of the delegation The delegation of the Russian Federation was headed by the Minster of Justice, Mr. Alexander Konovalov and composed of the following members: • Mr. Alexey Borodavkin, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations Office and Other International Organizations in Geneva; • Mr. Vladimir Davydov, Judge of the Supreme Court, member of the Presidium of the Supreme Court; • Mr. Georgy Matyushkin, Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights, Deputy Minister of Justice; • Mr. Stanislav Vavilov, Deputy Chairman of the Central Election Commission; • Mr. Andrey Nikiforov, Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations Office and Other International Organizations in Geneva; • Mr. Vladislav Tsaturov, Deputy Director, Federal Service for the Execution of Punishment; • Mr. Alexander Avdeyko, Head of Legal Department, Ministry of Interior; • Mr. Vladislav Starjenetskiy, Head of Division for International Law and Cooperation, Supreme Court of Arbitration; • Mr. Vladimir Yudin, Head of Division for Supervision of Investigation of the most important cases, Office of the Prosecutor General; • Mr. Alexey Zhafyarov, Acting Head of Division for Supervision of the Execution of Laws on Federal Security, Interethnic Relations and Countering Terrorism, Office of the Prosecutor General; • Ms. Natalia Antonova, Deputy Director, Department for Integral Analysis and Programming, Ministry of Labour and Social Security; • Ms. Marina Kruchinina, Deputy Director, Department of Mass Media Policy, Ministry of Communications and Mass Media; • Ms. Tatyana Vaguina, Deputy Director, Department for Non-Governmental Organizations, Ministry of Justice; • Mr. Andrey Timofeev, Deputy Head of Main Inspection Division, Head of Division for Information and Methodology, Investigative Committee; • Mr. Vadim Ovchinnikov, First Deputy Head of Division for Investigation Supervision, Office of the Prosecutor General; • Mr. Ilya Neronov, Deputy Head of Division for Electoral Disputes and Representation in Courts, Legal Department, Central Election Commission; • Mr. Leonid Medvedev, Deputy Head of Division, Federal Service for the Execution of Punishment; • Ms. Irina Terekhina, Head of Division, Department of State Policy for the Protection of the Rights of Children, Ministry of Education and Science; • Mr. Alexey Goltyaev, Acting Head of Division, Department for Humanitarian Cooperation and Human Rights, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Vadim Zelenev, Deputy Head of Division for protection of reproductive health, Department of Medical Service for Children and Obstetrics, Ministry of Healthcare; • Mr. Alexander Maguza, Senior Counsellor, Division for Criminal and Corruption Law, Department for Constitutional Law, Ministry of Justice; • Mr. Vladimir Zheglov, Senior Counsellor, Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations Office and Other International Organizations in Geneva; • Ms. Ekaterina Iontseva, Counsellor, Analytical Division, Federal Migration Service; • Mr. Sergey Rytenkov, Counsellor, Division for Moral and Psychological Support and Military Discipline, Ministry of Defense; • Ms. Natalia Zolotova, Counsellor, Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations Office and Other International Organizations in Geneva; • Mr. Sergey Kondratiev, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations Office and Other International Organizations in Geneva; • Mr. Roman Kashaev, Second Secretary, Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations Office and Other International Organizations in Geneva; • Mr. Dmitry Shishkin, Legal Referent, Office of the Representative of the Russian Federation at the European Court of Human Rights; • Mr. Sergey Ryakhovsky, Expert of the Commission for Civil Security and Cooperation with Judiciary and Law-Enforcement Bodies, the Public Chamber; • Ms. Elizaveta Sventitskaya, staff member, Department for Humanitarian Cooperation and Human Rights, Ministry of Foreign Affairs.     