  United Nations  A/HRC/24/7     General Assembly  Distr.: General 5 July2013  Original: English  Human Rights Council Twenty–fourth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   Uzbekistan Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–132 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–21 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  22–132 6  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  133–139 14  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  28 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review (UPR), established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its sixteenth session from 22 April to 3 May 2013. The review of Uzbekistan was held at the 5th meeting on 24 April 2013. The delegation of Uzbekistan was headed by Akmal Saidov, Chairman of the National Human Rights Centre. At its 10th meeting held on 26 April 2013, the Working Group adopted the report on Uzbekistan. 2. On 14 January 2013, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Uzbekistan: Angola, Germany and Indonesia. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Uzbekistan:  (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/UZB/1);  (b) A compilation prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/UZB/2);  (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/UZB/3 and Corr.1). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by the Czech Republic, Germany, Ireland, Mexico, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Uzbekistan through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the UPR.  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation of Uzbekistan stated that, following the first UPR review, Uzbekistan had adopted, after broad consultations, the National Plan of Action for 2009–2012, which contains 89 measures to implement the recommendations, sets deadlines and designates responsible officials (Government, educational institutions, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and the media). In June 2011, an international seminar was held on the implementation of the National Plan of Action, with participation of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR). For the preparation of the second national UPR report, an Intergovernmental Working Group was established. Consultative meetings were held with ministries and civil society, and the national report was approved by the Uzbek Parliament. 6. The gradual and full realization of economic, social, cultural and environmental rights has been receiving particular attention. A resolution was adopted by the Government to implement the Millennium Development Goals and annual parliamentary hearings are organized thereon. Uzbekistan has attained full access to universal education, with a literacy rate of 99.7 per cent. 7. Regarding the implementation of the recommendations of the first UPR review, Uzbekistan consistently fulfils its obligations under the international human rights treaties and has submitted 32 reports to the treaty bodies. Last year, it submitted reports to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and the Human Rights Committee, and its reports to the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the Committee against Torture will be examined this year. Ten National Plans of Action are currently being carried out to implement the recommendations made by the treaty bodies. Cooperation with Special Procedures was also highlighted. 8. In 2012, seven laws were adopted which aimed at ensuring the rule of law, the protection of human rights and freedoms, strengthening judicial control of pretrial proceedings and liberalizing the Criminal Code, the Code of Criminal Procedure and the Administrative Code. 9. In order to fully realize political rights, draft laws are in preparation in the following areas: social partnership, social control, parliamentary control and transparency of State power and governance. Measures are currently being taken to develop an “electronic Government”, including the creation of a single portal which will simplify citizens’ interaction with government services.  10. In February 2013, a State programme was approved for a “Year of well-being and prosperity” and measures are being developed aimed at strengthening the stability, security, civil and ethnic harmony, and growth and prosperity of society. Ten new laws were adopted in the past year to further democratic market reforms, liberalize the economy, ensure competitiveness and reduce the interference of Government in business operations. 11. International Labour Organization (ILO) standards on the prevention and elimination of child labour are consistently being met, and the protection of children in labour legislation was strengthened through appropriate legislation. ILO experts conducted a country visit, a seminar was organized and the Government adopted a resolution and a National Plan of Action to implement ILO conventions. 12. Uzbekistan continues its cooperation on human dimension and human rights protection with the Organization on Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), the European Union and the Venice Commission, including the European Union project on support to judicial reforms in Uzbekistan. 13. Uzbekistan actively takes part in the campaign for the World Programme for Human Rights Education and is implementing the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Education and Training. The National Programme for Improving Legal Culture in Society is currently being revised. An Interagency Council has been created which coordinates work on legal advocacy and education. 14. The delegation then responded to advance questions received from various States.  On the development of civil society and religion, respect for the rights and interests of NGOs is guaranteed. A public fund to support NGOs and other civil society actors is managed by a parliamentary commission with NGO participation, which has led to supporting over 1,000 NGOs in the past four years. The number of NGOs is constantly growing in the country, with over 6,400 organizations. Thirty international NGOs are present engaged in projects related to different fields. All religions are equal before the law. There are 16 confessions in the country, freely conducting their religious activities. In order to see to interfaith understanding and provide support to the different religious communities, a council was created within the Committee on Religious Affairs. 15. On places of detention, within the framework of a new strategy for reforming the judicial system, certain offences have been requalified and alternative sanctions have been introduced, including reconciliation and the broadened use of fines. Investigation procedures have been simplified and time frames for investigation and their consideration in courts have been shortened. The population of prisons has been halved in the last 12 years, to 166 prisoners per 100,000 inhabitants. Prison conditions are in keeping with international standards. 16. A National Plan of Action on the implementation of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment has been adopted, based on the recommendations made by the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and is being implemented. The ban of torture is enshrined in article 235 of the Criminal Code, which provides for criminal sanctions. Article 88 of the Code of Criminal Procedure forbids the use of torture during criminal investigations. 17. Uzbekistan is experiencing a sustainable economic growth, with an 8 per cent increase in gross domestic product over the last six years. Pensions have increased ninefold and wages have been multiplied by 18 since 2000, a period which has also seen a rise in life expectancy. Ninety-eight per cent of the population are homeowners and 97.5 per cent of rural families own land. Sixty per cent of the State budget is allocated to social expenditures. Specific educational, health and socially oriented programmes are being implemented in rural areas. Women represent half the workforce and are present at all levels of the legislative and executive branches. There is a noted decrease in early marriages and reproductive rights are guaranteed. Uzbekistan has ratified the main relevant international instruments and adopted a law on combating trafficking and rehabilitation of victims. 18. Regarding child labour, collective agreements between employers and trade unions contain a specific clause regulating the wages and social protection of persons younger than 18.  Distinction should be made between “child labour” and “worst forms of child labour”. Uzbekistan has ratified ILO Convention No. 138 on the minimum age for admission to employment and work and ILO Convention No. 182 on the worst forms of child labour, for which an institutional framework has been put in place, including cooperation with ILO and a National Plan of Action for 2011–2013, inspections with the involvement of various ministries and criminal liability for those employing children in worst forms of child labour (prostitution, trafficking and drugs). 19. Allegations of 1.5 million children between ages 10 and 12 working to harvest cotton are unfounded, which was also confirmed by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) in 2012. The introduction of compulsory 12-year schooling has provided alternatives. Cooperation with ILO builds on principles of mutual respect and concerns the ratification of other conventions, the development of social partnerships and the consolidation of the normative basis for labour security. 20. Measures have been taken to liberalize the media and to develop a legal system with a number of laws to foster their dynamic development. Several drafts are also currently under discussion, and a number of round tables and conferences were held including with the participation of OSCE experts. The liberalization of the media is gradually taking place. At present, 87 per cent of TV channels and the Internet are non-State media. There are 9 million Internet users in the country, with 4 million using mobile connections. Ninety-seven per cent of State institutions have their own websites. 21. On the questions about Roma, their exact number is not known – 20,000 according to official data, but according to population experts, the figure might be twice as high. The Government follows the relevant recommendations of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and has conducted a survey among the Roma population. It brought to light that 84 per cent of Roma are citizens of Uzbekistan and that the majority are Muslims. Ninety-nine per cent of the respondents stated that they did not experience discrimination in access to education and or limitations to their traditional lifestyle.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 22. During the interactive dialogue, 83 delegations made statements. Seventy-eight delegations made one or more recommendations, which are to be found in section II of the present report. 23. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela appreciated Uzbekistan’s efforts in social security and public health in terms of safeguarding and maintaining the level of income and access to food. 24. Viet Nam appreciated the reforms in the legislative, judicial and legal systems and adoptions of several acts on legislative instruments, the criminal code and elections at local levels. 25. Yemen commended the laws enacted ensuring the rule of law and protection of the rights of citizens. 26. Afghanistan noted Uzbekistan’s constitutional amendments to strengthen democratic reforms and noted progress in the promotion of women rights. 27. Algeria noted reforms to the judicial system and the adoption of the National Action Plan for the fight against the discrimination against women, among others. 28. Argentina commended ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, and of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, and noted the establishment of the National Action Plan to implement UPR recommendations. 29. Australia noted Uzbekistan’s adoption of habeas corpus legislation and its commitment to freedom of expression, association and assembly, although fundamental freedoms remain curtailed. 30. Austria was concerned about freedom of expression and media in Uzbekistan, referring to the imprisonments of Muhammad Bekjanov and Yusuf Ruzimuradov, and about strong indications of torture and ill-treatment. 31. Azerbaijan congratulated Uzbekistan on its accession to international human rights instruments and cooperation with United Nations treaty bodies and commended efforts to empower women and promote their rights. 32. Bahrain commended Uzbekistan’s National Action Plan enhancing legal and judicial reforms, especially the Act preventing child delinquency. 33. Bangladesh commended the measures to strengthen democratic reforms and to facilitate access to education. It asked how parliamentarians are involved in monitoring compliance with international human rights obligations. 34. Belarus appreciated Uzbekistan’s development of the legislative base, enabling the democratization of public life. It welcomed accession to international treaties and noted its fight against human trafficking. 35. Belgium commended Uzbekistan’s commitment to improve human rights through establishment of domestic human rights centres. It asked about actions promoting freedom of expression and about legal provisions adopted to prevent the torture of prisoners. 36. Brazil noted with satisfaction that Uzbekistan had implemented measures to improve the situation of women, persons with disabilities and children. It congratulated Uzbekistan for ratifying ILO Convention No. 138 on the minimum age for admission to employment and work and ILO Convention No. 182 on the worst forms of child labour, and for releasing political prisoners and implementing habeas corpus. 37. Brunei Darussalam was encouraged by Uzbekistan’s efforts toward children’s rights, and empowering and safeguarding women’s rights. It appreciated Uzbekistan promoting and protecting human rights through cooperation with the United Nations, its mechanisms and other relevant bodies. 38. Cambodia welcomed Uzbekistan’s adoption of national plans and measures to improve human rights, including political, legal and judicial reforms, enhancing gender equality, education and human rights training. 39. Cameroon noted the untiring efforts of Uzbekistan to further protect and promote human rights, in particular through the ratification of international instruments, the in-depth reform of the judicial and legal systems and the abolition of the death penalty. 40. Canada asked the delegation to detail implementation of human rights measures and concrete progress in combatting the forced labour of minors and civil servants, torture and enhanced interrogation techniques, among others. 41. Chile noted Human Rights Committee’s concern related to the Andijan events and wished to ensure that those responsible be brought to justice. 42. China welcomed the achievements in economic and social development, as well as in promoting and protecting human rights. It noted with appreciation improvements to health care, efforts to promote gender equality by respecting the rights of women and children, and cooperation with international organizations like OHCHR. 43. Uruguay highlighted Uzbekistan’s legislative and institutional reforms, ratification of human rights treaties, abolition of the death penalty and gradual liberalization of penal legislation. 44. Cuba commended measures to improve living conditions through gradually increasing wages and was especially pleased with Uzbekistan’s public health reform and its measures to combat HIV/AIDS. 45. Cyprus was concerned by continued forced labour of minors to meet cotton harvest quotas and the cessation of the visits of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to detainees, and asked whether ILO monitors would be allowed to visit. 46. The Czech Republic welcomed Uzbekistan’s efforts to eliminate forced labour of children and its adoption of new legislation on the judicial control of detention. 47. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea commended Uzbekistan’s national plan for implementing UPR recommendations and constitutional amendments strengthening democratic reforms, ensuring balance of power between the three branches of Government, and political parties and renewing and modernizing the country. 48. Ecuador recognized Uzbekistan’s abolition of the death penalty, judicial and legal reforms and ratification of international instruments on children’s rights, human trafficking, corruption and labour conditions. 49. On the question regarding the ICRC, Uzbekistan had cooperated and a large number of visits to places of detention were conducted by the ICRC. On 12 April 2013, the ICRC decided to terminate visits to countries, so it was not Uzbekistan which had put an end on such visits. On the question regarding Andijan, the issue is closed. 50. There are no political prisoners in Uzbekistan. Those “journalists” and “human rights defenders” who are in prison have been sentenced for acts prohibited by the Criminal Code. 51. On torture, every time a complaint is lodged regarding allegation of torture, an investigation is conducted by the Prosecutor’s Office and a special inspectorate and appropriate measures are taken. In 2011, ten law enforcement officers were brought to justice, and five in 2012. 52. Gender equality is a priority for Uzbekistan, which has ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and a number of international instruments including ILO Conventions. The issue of women is a state policy, with a special unit and a government programme which is being implemented on enhancing the role of women in society. 53. Uzbekistan accords high priority to health and education, through government programmes aimed at reforming the education and health system with important budgetary allocations and active cooperation with international organizations. Regarding HIV/AIDS, this is recognized as a priority issue and broad awareness-raising campaigns are organized among the public at large. 54. On trafficking, Uzbekistan has a firm legislative basis, having ratified the relevant international conventions and protocols, and an intergovernmental working group has been created to strengthen the work against trafficking by coordinating the work of the different agencies. 55. There are clear procedures for the registration of both national and international NGOs, documentation is required, and there is no individual approach. Government interference in the work of NGOs is forbidden, but limitations and denial of registration are possible if an organization pursues objectives which undermine national and public security, or incite hatred, and similar cases. NGOs can resubmit applications. 56. There is no limitation on NGO representatives leaving the country. Regarding human rights defenders, this concept is not provided for in national legislation. Any NGOs dealing with human rights can call themselves human rights defenders. 57. Religious freedom is recognized and the State provides every opportunity for people to profess their faith. However, proselytism, missionary activities and unregistered religious organization are forbidden, as well as the use of religious activities for propaganda aimed at terrorism and inciting hatred. 58. Human rights education is a priority area, involving some 6 million persons. More than 120 international instruments and documents have been translated into Uzbek, human rights education is practiced in schools, including on the rights of child, and specific materials and trainings have been developed for law enforcement bodies. 59. On questions regarding freedom of expression, Uzbekistan has a unique law on guarantees for the professional activities of journalists, and the education, training and requalification of journalists receive large attention. 60. Egypt commended Uzbekistan’s legislation on penal reform, judicial independence and electoral codes, and accession to multiple international human rights instruments on child labour. It asked Uzbekistan to detail solutions to prison overcrowding. 61. Estonia encouraged Uzbekistan to withdraw its reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. It remained concerned about freedom of expression and assembly and invited legal and practical conformity with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. 62. Finland asked about independent monitoring of harsh child labour in cotton harvesting and also asked what measures was taken to eradicate torture and ensure that no statement obtained under torture was used as evidence in trial. 63. France welcomed the ratification of Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty. 64. Germany was concerned about forced child labour, the difficulties faced by civil society organizations and reported torture. It called for cooperation with the ICRC, providing it with adequate working conditions and unrestricted access to detention facilities. 65. Guatemala welcomed the elaboration of a draft national action plan for human rights. It noted that the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women was concerned about the lack of a specific law for the protection of women against domestic violence. 66. Hungary commended efforts to eliminate forced child labour and stated that comprehensive, accelerated implementation of ILO forced labour conventions was required. It was concerned about restrictions on religious activity. 67. India praised successful implementation of National Action Plans and commended achievements in women and children’s rights, through educational reforms and efforts on technical cooperation, the rule of law and the implementation of international standards. 68. Indonesia commended Uzbekistan’s adoption of laws on habeas corpus and budget-backed educational reform. It welcomed its efforts to integrate international standards into its domestic laws through ratification. 69. The Islamic Republic of Iran recognized Uzbekistan’s progress in promoting and protecting human rights since the first UPR cycle, especially its constitutional amendments aimed at improving socioeconomic and political life. 70. Iraq appreciated Uzbekistan’s promotion and protection of human rights by guaranteeing the rule of law, ensuring the rights of women, children, persons with disabilities and minorities, and pursuing efforts in health, education and employment. 71. Ireland urged Uzbekistan to treat the issue of female sterilization with sensitivity, ensuring that sterilizations require prior and informed consent. It remained concerned at reported torture in detention facilities. 72. Italy asked about Uzbekistan’s plans to tackle violence against women and whether it envisaged specific assistance and protection measures. 73. Japan welcomed cooperation with special procedures and encouraged implementing the observations of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women concerning gender inequality in marriage and employment. It noted constraints on NGOs, human rights defenders and freedom of expression. 74. Kazakhstan welcomed Uzbekistan’s efforts in judicial and legal reform including the abolition of the death penalty. It noted that Uzbekistan has ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, ILO Convention No. 138 on the minimum age for admission to employment and work, and the United Nations Convention against Corruption. 75. Kenya encouraged Uzbekistan’s judicial reforms and recent updates of penal law and criminal procedures in compliance with treaty obligations. 76. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic appreciated Uzbekistan’s ratification and implementation of regional and international instruments. 77. Latvia noted that a significant number of requests to visit by Special Procedures mandate holders had not yet been accepted by Uzbekistan. 78. Malaysia welcomed Uzbekistan’s efforts to instil human rights values through educational programmes, its advancement of women’s and children’s rights and its judicial and legal reforms. It noted efforts to combat trafficking, particularly of women and children. 79. Mauritania commended judicial reform, including crime reclassification, abolition of the death penalty and ratification of international instruments. 80. Mexico commended the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, and of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, the signature of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, and progress towards education of young people, thereby avoiding involvement in traditional agriculture. 81. Montenegro applauded the ratification of the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty and efforts to protect children against torture and degrading treatment. It asked about concrete steps to amend the Criminal Code to decriminalize consensual sexual activity between adult males. 82. Morocco asked about existing coordination between stakeholders in implementing human rights policies and steps taken to encourage action of civil society in promoting human rights. 83. Namibia noted measures against organized crime, including prevention and judicial measures and commended the enactment of the Prevention of Child Neglect and Juvenile Delinquency Act 2010. 84. The Netherlands expressed grave concern regarding forced sterilizations, reminding Uzbekistan of its obligations with regard to the rights of women. It also recognized progress in democratic reform, the formation of civil society and decreased use of child labour. 85. On questions related to the issue of child labour, Uzbekistan is compliant, following ratification of ILO Convention No. 182 on the worst forms of child labour. Comments on alternative opportunities for young people were very relevant since every year Uzbekistan sees thousands of young people entering the labour market and measures are needed to prevent employment prior to finishing education. There are no mass phenomena of child labour, street children and juvenile delinquency. 86. Regarding a possible special monitoring mission by the ILO, the National Plan of Action included improving legislation, monitoring, awareness-raising and the implementation of international cooperation programmes, including the ILO Decent Work Country Programme. Criminal responsibility for employing in violation of minimum age rules has also been established – the minimum age for employment is 16, with separate provisions for workers aged between 16 and 18. Appropriate institutional mechanisms have been set up for compliance with the various international instruments, including ILO Convention No. 138 on the minimum age for admission to employment and work. Information thereon is submitted to ILO and has been positively received. Regarding the question of a special mission, it is not acceptable to have a selective politicization of the issue. A campaign is conducted against Uzbekistan on the issue of child labour as a result of competition on economic markets with the involvement of a number of Western cotton companies; double standards are applied. 87. Replying to a question, the delegation confirmed that Uzbekistan does not have any reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. 88. On questions regarding the decriminalization of homosexuality, the Criminal Code forbids consensual sexual relations between men, but this does not apply to women. There are no plans in the near future to repeal this law which reflects traditions that have developed over more than 1,000 years. Uzbekistan in this respect shares the position of the Muslim countries expressed during the discussions of this issue within the Human Rights Council. 89. On questions related to NGOs and religious organizations, in particular, the decriminalization of missionary activities, there are many registered confessions in Uzbekistan and 90 per cent of the population is Muslim. Interconfessional harmony is a very important element and such a move might be fraught with negative consequences. NGOs – like religious organizations – have to be registered in due form, but registration procedures are not complicated. 90. On questions regarding prison conditions, there is no overcrowding and the prison population has significantly decreased in the last 10 years. On habeas corpus, legislation was adopted in 2011 on custody during criminal proceedings and for the establishment of controls which strengthened the rights of detainees and clarified provisions of detention. 91. Children with disabilities have the same rights and access to social services and education as other children, and there are special budgetary allocations in support of these policies, which aim at the personal development of such children. One of the priorities is strengthening of the family, in particular by giving support to the very high number of young families, including by providing them access to housing and employment opportunities. Domestic violence is criminalized and subject to administrative laws. 92. On the legal age of marriage, it is 18 for men and 17 for women. However, the average age of marriage for women is higher since the number of women marrying later is increasing, reflecting the access to free education and training. In the last 20 years, the rate of maternal and infant mortality, as well as the number of children born with malformations, has significantly decreased, and Uzbekistan has achieved the Millennium Development Goal in this area as also noted by the World Health Organization. 93. Reacting to a reference on the systematic use of torture, there is no such concept in international law. It was reiterated that Uzbekistan does not agree to decriminalize either missionary activities or proselylitism, and there is a ban on activities of organizations which are not registered. 94. Nicaragua welcomed strengthened democratic institutions and civil participation in exercising democracy, as well as continued training on human rights for actors in the administration of justice. 95. Nigeria commended progress made in promoting and protecting human rights across the country, and in adopting and implementing national action plans related to human rights. 96. Norway expressed concerns about reported violations, including cruel treatment of prisoners, forced child labour, the persecution of human rights defenders and limitations on freedom of speech and the media. 97. Oman noted efforts to implement recommendations from the first cycle of the UPR, and the adoption of a national human rights action plan. 98. Pakistan praised Uzbekistan’s efforts implementing and the concluding observations of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, and also welcomed independent monitoring of the observance of human rights by law enforcement agencies. 99. Paraguay welcomed Uzbekistan’s legislation on procedural guarantees, criminal procedural reforms, new electoral rules and ratification of various international conventions. 100. The Philippines acknowledged the ratification of conventions on women, human trafficking and torture. It praised the translation and distribution of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, and human rights capacity-building for law enforcement and the judiciary, among others. 101. Poland asked about efforts conforming laws to articles 19, 21 and 22 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. It noted Human Rights Committee concerns on political restrictions on parties and associations, and Special Rapporteur concerns regarding intimidation and inadequate trials of protesters. 102. Portugal expressed concern regarding the alleged harassment, intimidation and house arrest of human rights defenders, journalists and opposition members, as well as the torture and mistreatment of prisoners. 103. Qatar welcomed legal, judicial and legislative changes, including the ratification of the United Nations Convention against Corruption and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. 104. The Republic of Korea acknowledged reform of the judicial and legal system and commended the national action plan, which included elimination of racial discrimination and promotion of children’s rights. 105. The Republic of Moldova applauded the steps taken to further promote gender equality, prevent and protect women from domestic violence, and combat human trafficking. 106. Romania took note of the adoption of a national action plan to implement those recommendations adopted subsequent to the 2008 UPR, and proposed that a similar instrument be established following the current session. 107. The Russian Federation welcomed Uzbekistan’s commitment to cooperating with international human rights instruments and mechanisms, including the UPR. 108. Saudi Arabia noted the implementation of recommendations from the previous cycle and the ratification of international instruments including ILO Conventions related to human trafficking, particularly trafficking of women and children. 109. Senegal acknowledged the ratification of several international instruments and continuing legislative and judicial reform. It acknowledged the improvements in prisons, juvenile justice and the situation of women and children. 110. Singapore noted a reduction in income disparity owing to economic growth and acknowledged progress towards gender equality and eradicating discrimination, including women’s access to higher education. 111. Slovakia commended the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, and the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty, as well as health system reforms leading to increased availability of maternal and child health care and an improved education infrastructure. 112. Slovenia welcomed the focus on women and children’s rights, particularly the action plan to implement the outcomes of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women. It regretted poor cooperation with Special Procedures. 113. Spain noted that constitutional reform, ratification of international instruments and creation of a national human rights action plan must continue. Cooperation with Special Procedures was important, as well as the need to improve legal system guarantees. 114. Sri Lanka commended the creation of a legislative framework for children’s rights, educational reform and efforts to eradicate child labour and the role of educational system reforms in this regard. It took note of Uzbekistan’s efforts to safeguard women’s rights, and progress made in the health sector. 115. The State of Palestine applauded the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, and the inclusion of Millennium Development Goal 3 to “promote gender equality and empower women” in national development programmes. 116. Sweden expressed concern at the termination of ICRC prison visits, and encouraged the establishment of a national monitoring mechanism for prisons. It asked about measures being taken to consolidate the child labour ban, noting the 2012 decrease. 117. Switzerland expressed concern regarding restrictions and reports of intimidation of human rights defenders, journalists and opposition members. It regretted the decision of the ICRC to terminate visits to detention centres. 118. Thailand commended the legislative, democratic, judicial and legal reforms; improved medical care for children; promotion of school attendance; and a special school for children with disabilities. 119. Tunisia welcomed the constitutional, legal and judicial reform and laws adopted to improve human rights. It applauded the recent signature of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, and encouraged its ratification and implementation. 120. Turkmenistan applauded constitutional amendments to strengthen democratic reform, the formation of civil society and the democratization of the State. 121. Ukraine welcomed progress on human rights in environmental crises, and encouraged their inclusion in environmental policies. It asked about the status of the draft bill on ecological oversight. 122. The United Arab Emirates welcomed national development objectives and encouraged their implementation. It asked for information about the draft national programme for employment. 123. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland commended the abolition of the death penalty, the implementation of habeas corpus and the legislation on prisoner treatment. It expressed concern for freedom of assembly and expression and reported torture, and called for the release of detainees wrongfully imprisoned on political charges. 124. The United States of America was concerned by irregular court proceedings and torture in prisons, the cessation of ICRC detainee visits, forced labour in the cotton harvest and restrictions on expression, assembly and association on political and religious grounds. 125. Costa Rica noted progress in protection of human rights and the adoption of the National Action Plan for the implementation of the 2008 UPR recommendations. It expressed concern for the torture and ill-treatment of detainees. 126. As part of the public health programme, several measures have been taken to develop access in rural areas to medical services, modern medical equipment and hospitals, including for children. Equal access to health services is ensured for the whole population. Women have the choice of free contraceptive methods and receive information thereon. 127. Regarding women’s participation in public life, 22 per cent of senators are women, who also hold important positions and portfolios in the Government. Limits based on gender do not exist. Violence against women is prohibited. Discrimination in the workplace is forbidden by anti-discrimination laws. With the aim of bridging wage differences between men and women, Uzbekistan has ratified ILO Convention No. 100 concerning Equal Remuneration for Men and Women Workers for Work of Equal Value. Public trade union monitoring has been introduced for child labour, and during the 2012 cotton harvest, no case of child labour was registered. 128. Uzbekistan replied to 36 requests from special rapporteurs. The Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially in women and children, positively assessed the replies received, and positive comments were made as well by the Special Rapporteur on the right to education. 129. On torture, all three branches of the State condemn torture, and the definition of torture contained in article 235 of the Criminal Code was developed in consultation with international experts. Uzbekistan also disposes of a national preventive mechanism, which albeit not connected to the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, contains all its relevant elements. A number of round tables on the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment had been held, as well as consultations with OSCE and the European Union, using models from a number of European Union countries. Provisions in the Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure foresee the obligation for the prison administration to allow for the access of detainees to the Ombudsman, with whom they are entitled to confidential meetings and correspondence, and who plays a central role in prevention. Laws have moreover been adopted allowing for visits of penitentiaries by the diplomatic corps and NGOs. 130. During her visit, Vivien Stern from Penal Reform International noted that overcrowding of prisons is not a problem in Uzbekistan. By decriminalizing certain offences, a number of charges no longer lead to prison sentences. In addition, amnesty laws for a number of offences have been promulgated. 131. The implementation of laws is as important as adopting them. In Uzbekistan, a legislative framework exists, and readiness was expressed to closely cooperate with international organizations and national and international NGOs in their implementation. 132. In conclusion, the delegation thanked the Troika, the OHCHR and the President of the Council, as well as all delegations for the useful questions and reiterated its readiness to cooperate.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**  ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 133. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue/listed below have been examined by Uzbekistan and enjoy the support of Uzbekistan: 133.1. Continue the legal and legislative reforms (Saudi Arabia); 133.2. Adopt relevant legislative acts and put forward monitoring mechanisms to ensure their effective implementation (Saudi Arabia); 133.3. Continue the legal reforms and improve public freedoms and human rights (Mauritania); 133.4. Improve domestic mechanisms for the implementation of international human rights obligations (Russian Federation); 133.5. Continue the efforts to strengthen the national legal framework for human rights (Morocco); 133.6. Take steps to fully implement the ratified international documents (Kazakhstan); 133.7. Concentrate on the implementation of international human rights instruments that have been ratified by the country (Afghanistan); 133.8. Continue to work towards overcoming the challenges identified in paragraph 167 of its national report that affect the quality of implementation of the provisions of international human rights agreements (Nigeria); 133.9. Consider further strengthening of the national human rights institution (Kenya); 133.10. Upgrade its existing national human rights monitoring mechanisms into a national human rights institution that meets the Paris Principles (Egypt); 133.11. Further strengthen national human rights institutions and mechanisms, especially on capacity-building for law enforcement and judicial systems in the fields of child labour, trafficking women and organized crimes (Viet Nam); 133.12. Continue to promote the completion of drafting the national human rights action plan (China); 133.13. Continue the efforts aimed at adopting a national programme and plan of action in the field of human rights (Algeria); 133.14. Provide adequate resources for the full implementation of the several national action plans on human rights promotion and protection (Philippines); 133.15. Continue to proceed with the adoption of the National Action Programme in the field of human rights in accordance with the provisions of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action on Human Rights (State of Palestine); 133.16. Continue its efforts in the field of human rights education and training (Egypt); 133.17. Pay special attention to education and training in the field of human rights, in particular for members of the law enforcement and judiciary bodies (Russian Federation); 133.18. Promote the culture of human rights through awareness-raising and education, in particular through training programmes for the benefit of law enforcement (Morocco); 133.19. Continue with training for civil servants, those in courts, forces of law and order, on human rights, as well as with empowering the population with these rights (Ecuador); 133.20. Continue the policy of national action plans in several areas to implement treaty body recommendations and those from the Universal Periodic Review mechanism (Cameroon); 133.21. Continue constructive cooperation with universal mechanisms for the promotion and protection of human rights (Russian Federation); 133.22. Continue the practice of constructive engagement by the country with relevant international human rights mechanisms (Pakistan); 133.23. Further continue the existing cooperation with the United Nations human rights mechanisms (Azerbaijan); 133.24. Consider further enhancing its cooperation with the human rights treaty mechanisms (Kenya); 133.25. Cooperate fully and effectively with independent human rights monitoring bodies, including United Nations treaty bodies (Austria); 133.26. Implement a comprehensive national plan of action for the advancement of women and create mechanisms to coordinate and monitor its implementation (Republic of Moldova); 133.27. Take more effective steps in strengthening gender equality and women empowerment in the country and in ensuring a plan of comprehensive development of children (Cambodia); 133.28. Strengthen national mechanisms for the protection of the rights of socially vulnerable groups of the population, including women, children and persons with disabilities (Russian Federation); 133.29. Actively combat any form of racism, xenophobia and intolerance (Russian Federation); 133.30. Undertake effective measures against torture and ill-treatment including human rights training of law enforcement bodies (Austria); 133.31. Improve conditions of detention in prisons (Cameroon); 133.32. Continue the efforts to improve prison conditions (Senegal); 133.33. Expedite establishment of an independent monitoring mechanism of all places of detention (Sweden); 133.34. Continue measures aimed at strengthening national mechanism for monitoring places of detention (Pakistan); 133.35. Allow unfettered regular access of the ICRC to detention and prison facilities (Czech Republic); 133.36. Allow the ICRC unrestricted access to all penitentiary facilities, including pre-detention facilities, and provide it with appropriate working conditions (Germany); 133.37. Continue the campaign carried out by the Government to raise population’s awareness on domestic violence (Guatemala); 133.38. Keep on its effective measures for further promotion and protection of the right of child (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 133.39. Continue to pursue its measures to curb incitement to violence, brutality and child pornography (Bangladesh); 133.40. Take immediate and effective time-bound measures to eradicate the forced labour of, or hazardous work, by children (Finland); 133.41. Eliminate all forced labour and hazardous child labour and implement recommendations of the ILO supervisory bodies (United States of America); 133.42. Continue to fight against child labour and ensure their rights, and in this respect, accept to develop a comprehensive cooperation with ILO which shall include the fight against forced labour (France); 133.43. Ensure full compliance with international child labour standards, including ILO Convention No. 182 on the worst forms of child labour, collaborate with the ILO to that effect and carefully consider the relevant recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the Human Rights Committee (Canada); 133.44. Strengthen its monitoring system to eliminate possibility of forced child labour in cotton production (Republic of Korea); 133.45. Improve compliance with International Labour Organization standards, including in relation to forced labour (Australia); 133.46. Further speed up efforts to prevent and eliminate trafficking in persons (Belarus); 133.47. Take further efforts to promote and protect women’s rights, including measures to prevent trafficking in women (Pakistan); 133.48. Take further efforts to promote and protect women’s rights, including measures to prevent and combat trafficking in women (Malaysia); 133.49. Enhance its efforts in combating the phenomena of trafficking in persons, particularly women and children, and raise awareness of its dangers (Qatar); 133.50. Take appropriate measures and further actions to combat trafficking in women and children and impose appropriate punishment for it on perpetrators (Bahrain); 133.51. Continue efforts to combat trafficking in women and children in the framework of implementation of the national legislation and international obligations of the country (Cambodia); 133.52. Increase international, regional and bilateral cooperation to prevent human trafficking (Sri Lanka); 133.53. Increase international, regional and bilateral cooperation to prevent human trafficking and prosecute and punish traffickers (Republic of Moldova); 133.54. Expedite its efforts in combating against trafficking of women and girls through, inter alia, increasing its cooperation with international, regional and bilateral mechanism (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 133.55. Continue to implement reforms in the judiciary (Bangladesh); 133.56. Carry out judicial and penitentiary reform aimed to guarantee that trials are impartial and fair and that detention conditions are in accordance with international law, not only in letter but also in practice (Norway); 133.57. Implement further necessary legislative and administrative reforms in order to ensure that all trials take place according to international standards for a fair, independent and impartial trial, including those that involve persons accused of religious extremism or members of unregistered organizations (Spain); 133.58. Further strengthen cooperation with the United Nations human rights mechanisms in the field of juvenile rights (Kazakhstan); 133.59. Continue its efforts in providing support and protection for the family, as a fundamental and natural unit of society (Egypt); 133.60. Continue promoting and developing the activities of civil society (Cameroon); 133.61. Take measures to guarantee the freedom of expression for all people, including human rights defenders (Japan); 133.62. Take positive steps to ensure that everyone, including human right defenders, independent journalists and NGOs, can peacefully exercise their right of the freedom of expression (Belgium); 133.63. Ensure that everyone can peacefully exercise his or her right to the freedom of expression in conformity with the country’s obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Slovakia); 133.64. Allow representatives of international organizations and non-governmental organizations to work in the country and guarantee the exercise of freedom of expression in conformity with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Chile); 133.65. Adopt effective measures to prevent any harassment or intimidation of all those exercising their democratic rights of freedom of association and expression (Canada); 133.66. Include full implementation of freedom of opinion, freedom of assembly and association among the priorities of the national programme of action in the field of human rights, that Uzbekistan intends to elaborate (Poland); 133.67. Safeguard freedom of expression, association and of the press and eradicate any type of activity that may be considered torture under judicial procedures (Paraguay); 133.68. Enhance its efforts to create an environment in which journalists, human rights defenders and NGOs can freely operate according with international standards (Italy); 133.69. Promote the role of independent non-governmental organizations and take effective measures to ensure the full realization of the rights to freedom of expression, including on internet, assembly and association (Czech Republic); 133.70. Take appropriate action to guarantee freedom of expression, association and assembly – including by allowing independent media, political parties and civil society groups to operate (Australia); 133.71. Continue to pay attention to the protection of political rights and civil freedoms (Yemen); 133.72. Continue making efforts to ensure active participation of women in the country’s governance (Nicaragua); 133.73. Expand employment opportunities for women to cover government jobs which allow women to participate effectively in political life (United Arab Emirates); 133.74. Continue implementing social programmes to promote equity-based development of the country (Nicaragua); 133.75. Continue the programmes aimed at improving the living conditions of its population (Bahrain); 133.76. Continue the practice of implementing programmes aimed at further improving the welfare of the population (Turkmenistan); 133.77. Strengthen socioeconomic projects to ensure economic, social and cultural rights, and consequently, to improve the standard of living of the citizens (Algeria); 133.78. Improve food security and access to drinking water for the whole population (Ecuador); 133.79. Continue to strengthen successful programmes to promote employment, food and assistance to the most vulnerable in combating poverty and social inequality (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 133.80. Continue its efforts on current national action plans for job creation, quality education, health care and social security, with more focus on vulnerable groups of women, children, persons with difficulties, migrants and ethnic minorities (Viet Nam); 133.81. Strengthen the application of the rights enshrined in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, with special attention to children, women, persons with disabilities, the elderly and families with limited resources (Ecuador); 133.82. Increase efforts to ensure universal access to health care (Oman); 133.83. Continue to implement programmes to improve public access to quality medical and health care services (Singapore); 133.84. Continue the efforts to continue improving the living conditions of the population, including improving access to basic health services with the support of the international community (Cuba); 133.85. Continue to cooperate closely with civil society to prevent and combat dissemination of HIV/AIDS among the population (Cuba); 133.86. Continue its legal efforts on the improvement of the health-care system, particularly for mothers and child (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 133.87. Reinforce work for maternal and child health (Senegal); 133.88. Take further measures to protect the environment and human health in the context of ensuring effective ways of sustainable development (Turkmenistan); 133.89. Continue to take measures to allow the improvement of the education system and universal access to a quality education (Cuba); 133.90. Continue the efforts for the improvement of the access to education as an important factor in the process of democratization (Morocco); 133.91. Continue to adopt its successful social policy of access to education and health services, particularly, of women and girls (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 133.92. Further strengthen efforts to ensure equal access of girls and women to all levels of education (Sri Lanka); 133.93. Provide adequate financial and human resources towards the promotion of the right to education and that of the rights of the child, as a whole (Malaysia); 133.94. Continue its efforts aimed at enforcing and improving the quality of the educational system with a view to ensuring that the young generation would receive the best opportunities for education and training (Qatar); 133.95. Further promote inclusive and accessible education to children with disabilities at ordinary schools (Thailand); 133.96. Promote the rights of persons with disabilities with the aim to ensuring their social integration (Oman); 133.97. Continue to combat terrorism, separatism and religious extremism and make sure people will enjoy human rights in a peaceful and stable environment (China); 133.98. Continue to strengthen the enabling environment for the protection and promotion of human rights (Philippines); 133.99. Continue to take tangible measures to achieve the Millennium Development Goals (Oman); 133.100. Continue the implementation of concrete measures to realize the United Nations Millennium Development Goals, to strengthen cooperation with international partners (State of Palestine); 133.101. Continue its measures in the field of promoting women rights, approving the national plan of action for 2010–2012 to implement the concluding observations of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, incorporating the goals of the Millennium Declaration into the country’s development programmes, and meeting the Millennium Development Goals for 2015 (Azerbaijan). 134. Uzbekistan considers that recommendations below are already implemented or in the process of implementation: 134.1. Consider establishing a national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Ukraine); 134.2. Establish a national institution in accordance with the Paris Principles, providing it with the necessary technical and financial resources and request technical cooperation from the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (Uruguay); 134.3. Continue the efforts to strengthen the institutional framework of  human rights promotion and protection, including by fully operationalizing the interdepartmental working group with mandate to monitor the consideration and the settlement of complaints by citizens and considering the establishment of an independent National Human Rights Institution, in full conformity with the Paris Principles (Indonesia); 134.4. Take action so as to cooperate with the Special Rapporteurs of the United Nations (Romania); 134.5. Cooperate fully and effectively with Special Procedures mandate holders (Austria); 134.6. Take all necessary action to allow access to the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (Belgium)1;  1 The original wording of the recommendation: “Take all necessary measures to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and to allow access to the Special Rapporteur on Torture.” 134.7. Take all necessary measures to prevent torture and accept the long-standing request of the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment to visit Uzbekistan (Germany); 134.8. Implement fully and effectively the recommendations by the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in his 2003 report and the Committee against Torture in its concluding observations in 2011 (Ireland); 134.9. Ensure that all cases of alleged torture are promptly investigated by an independent body, perpetrators are brought to justice and victims of torture are adequately compensated (Austria); 134.10. Pursue appropriate measures to effectively prevent torture and ill-treatment, ensuring that all alleged cases of torture are credibly and independently investigated and prosecuted, providing due redress to victims (Slovakia); 134.11. Take effective measures to eliminate the use of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment on an urgent basis, investigate allegations of such acts and prosecute and punish all those responsible (Canada); 134.12. Investigate and prosecute all allegations of torture carried out by government correctional services or security forces (Namibia); 134.13. Accelerate the process of adoption of the new revised version of the draft law on equal rights and opportunities for women and men (Republic of Moldova); 134.14. Take measures to protect further and promote the rights of women, including through international cooperation to prevent human trafficking and by criminalizing domestic violence and marital rape (Australia); 134.15. Develop infrastructure for technical training, recreation and leisure for children and young people, particularly in rural areas, with a view to promoting alternative activities, rather than having young people participate in traditional crop gathering (Mexico); 134.16. Ensure that all trials, including those of persons charged with terrorism or in connection with membership of banned religious organizations, uphold international standards of fair trial (Finland); 134.17. Consider effective measures to prevent any unreasonable restrictions on the freedom of religion or belief as well as any related discriminatory treatment (Republic of Korea); 134.18. Reflect on how to revise its legislation in order to better protect freedom of religion or belief for all individuals and groups without discrimination, in full compliance with article 18 of International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Italy); 134.19. Recognize the right to conscientious objection, ensuring that conscientious objectors are not subjected to reprisals (Slovakia); 134.20. Fully recognize the right of conscientious objection to military service without discrimination as to the religion or belief on which the objection is based, and provide civilian alternative service compatible with international standards (Slovenia); 134.21. Introduce less restrictive and transparent regulations on the registration of political parties and public association (Poland); 134.22. Ease registration procedures for independent political parties and for independent national and international NGOs before Parliamentary and Presidential elections (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 134.23. Enable independent NGOs, including international human rights organisations to freely register and to operate in accordance with international law and standards (Norway); 134.24. Adopt effective measures to ensure that representatives of NGOs work freely in the country and guarantee that journalists and human rights defenders enjoy the freedoms of expression, assembly and association (Portugal); 134.25. Ensure that civil society organizations and NGOs can work freely and unhindered by undue restrictions, including prohibitive registrations requirements, burdensome programme approval and authorization regulations as well as censorship of printed materials (Germany); 134.26. Ensure that any person, including human rights defenders,  members of civil society and journalists can exercise their legitimate activities without fear of reprisals, as well as ensure their rights to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly, in line with the obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Switzerland); 134.27. Ensure media freedom, including Internet freedom, by eliminating all restrictions to the activities of independent media and human rights organizations (Estonia); 134.28. Take concrete measures towards genuine media freedom and freedom of expression and to establish a climate conducive to safe and enabling working conditions for journalists, bloggers, media outlets and human rights defenders (Austria); 134.29. Provide conditions that are conducive to the development of free and critical media, and improve foreign journalists’ access to the country, both on a permanent and on an occasional basis (Norway); 134.30. Ensure equal opportunity to employment and the right to equal pay for equal jobs for women (Thailand). 135. The following recommendations will be examined by Uzbekistan which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-fourth session of the Human Rights Council in September 2013: 135.1. Ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Brazil) (Iraq); 135.2. Intensify efforts to ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (State of Palestine); 135.3. Continue its legal measures on ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities which had been signed by the Government in early 2009 (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 135.4. Continue the effort to integrate international norms into national legislations by way of ratification, including by completing the ratification process of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Indonesia); 135.5. Intensify efforts to safeguard the rights of women and eliminate discriminatory practices against them (Nigeria); 135.6. Continue its efforts to eliminate discrimination against women, especially those living in the rural areas (Singapore); 135.7. Accelerate the process for adopting the law for equality between men and women (Spain); 135.8. Put an end to torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment or treatment by applying the recommendations of the Committee against Torture, the Human Rights Committee, and the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (Switzerland); 135.9. Adopt a specific law protecting women against domestic violence and prosecuting and punishing the perpetrators (Republic of Moldova); 135.10. Eliminate the forced labour of children, especially through the effective implementation of national legislation and international conventions ratified in this respect, and authorize the ILO to carry out monitoring of the cotton harvest (Switzerland); 135.11. Accept a visit by an ILO mission during the next cotton harvesting season to monitor the situation of forced labour (Hungary); 135.12. Invite a tripartite ILO mission to monitor the situation during the cotton harvest with regard to its compliance with labour Conventions to which Uzbekistan is party (Germany); 135.13. Give the International Labour Organization together with the United Nations access to Uzbekistan with the aim of monitoring the development on the use of child labour and assisting with advice (Sweden); 135.14. Review the provisions on defamation and insult in articles 139 and 140 of the Criminal Code (Portugal). 136. The recommendations below did not enjoy the support of Uzbekistan: 136.1. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Portugal); 136.2. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Estonia); 136.3. Become a party to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Montenegro); 136.4. Urgently ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment as well as the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in order to allow visits to places of detention (Costa Rica); 136.5. Take all necessary measures to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Belgium); 136.6. Sign the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Sweden); 136.7. Consider signing and ratifying the new Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Slovakia); 136.8. Consider ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure to protect the child’s rights (Thailand); 136.9. Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and their Families (Guatemala) (Philippines); 136.10. Join the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Iraq); 136.11. Accede to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Uruguay); 136.12. Sign and ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (France); 136.13. Take all necessary steps to ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Sweden); 136.14. Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, which will enter into force in coming weeks (Spain); 136.15. Ratify the Rome Statue of the International Criminal Court and the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the International Criminal Court (Estonia); 136.16. Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and to fully align its legislation with all obligations under the Statute (Latvia); 136.17. Take action so as to ratify the Rome Statute on the International Criminal Court (Romania); 136.18. Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and their Families, the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees of 1951 (Argentina); 136.19. Consider the possibility of ratifying the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and the Rome Statue of the International Criminal Court (Tunisia); 136.20. Ratify the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its Optional Protocol of 1967, and accede to the 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness (Uruguay); 136.21. Extend a standing invitation for country visits (Slovenia); 136.22. Issue a standing invitation to the Special Procedures (Guatemala); 136.23. Extend a standing invitation to the Special Procedures of the Human Rights Council (Belgium) (Portugal); 136.24. Extend a standing invitation to the Special Procedures mandate holders of the Human Rights Council (Costa Rica); 136.25. Issue a standing invitation to the Special Procedures mandate holders of the Human Rights Council (Tunisia); 136.26. Extend a standing invitation to all thematic Special Procedures (Montenegro); 136.27. Extend an open and standing invitation to Special Procedures mandate holders across the board (Spain); 136.28. Extend invitations in a timely manner to the Special Procedures thematic mandate holders who have requested to visit the country (Japan); 136.29. Accept as many requests as possible of the Special Procedures of the Human Rights Council to visit Uzbekistan (Brazil); 136.30. Allow unhindered access for independent human rights monitors by issuing a standing invitation to the Special Procedures of the Human Rights Council (Hungary); 136.31. Accelerate the issuing of invitations to rapporteurs who have been requesting to visit the country for several years (Spain); 136.32. Step up its cooperation with the Special Procedures of the Human Rights Council by responding positively to the pending visit requests and eventually consider extending a standing invitation to all the Special Procedures mandate holders of the Human Rights Council (Latvia); 136.33. Agree a precise and early date for the visit by the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders (Ireland); 136.34. Extend standing invitations to the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders and other United Nations Special Rapporteurs on human rights issues, in particular those who have made visit requests (Netherlands); 136.35. Send an open invitation to all Special Procedures, rapporteurs of the Human Rights Council, and the ILO (Paraguay); 136.36. Guarantee the rights of women, particularly with regard to eradicating forced sterilizations, and ensure safe contraception policies and equal labour conditions (Paraguay); 136.37. Ensure religious minorities, including other Christians, are not discriminated against based on their faith (Namibia); 136.38. Continue its efforts to eliminate torture, accede to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and establish its national preventive mechanism accordingly (Czech Republic); 136.39. Put an end to all practices of torture, align its definition of torture with article 1 of the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Portugal); 136.40. Step up efforts to fight against torture and ill-treatment by signing the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and establishing an independent national mechanism of prevention with sufficient resources (France); 136.41. Introduce a definition of torture into its criminal code that is in line with Article 1 of the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, establish an effective mechanism to investigate credible allegations of torture, ensuring that perpetrators are held to account, and put in place the necessary arrangement to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 136.42. Initiate prompt, thorough and independent investigations of all torture allegations and end politically motivated prosecutions by ensuring all trials conform to obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights  (United States of America); 136.43. Release all political prisoners and address torture and prisoner welfare – including by allowing independent monitoring of prisons (Australia); 136.44. Close Jaslyk Prison, or relocate it in order to improve the conditions of detention and its accessibility (Canada); 136.45. Put an end to all forms of arbitrary detention, in conformity with the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and release all prisoners, whose sentence has been extended, without a fair trial, beyond their initial sentence (France) 136.46. Either immediately free political prisoners and human rights activists who have been illegally detained or forced out of the country, or allow them to return to Uzbekistan to enjoy their basic rights and freedoms (Canada); 136.47. Take all measures to eliminate child labour (Namibia); 136.48. Launch mechanisms for recognition of truth and compensation to victims of Andijan (Mexico); 136.49. Adopt measures with a view to combating discrimination and intolerance from which the LGBT population suffers (Argentina); 136.50. Eliminate from the Criminal Code the criminalization of same-sex sexual relationships and at the same time redouble efforts to end discrimination against the LGBT group (Spain); 136.51. Decriminalize consensual homosexual activity in compliance with its obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Netherlands); 136.52. Revise penal legislation which criminalizes sexual orientation with a view to ensuring conformity with article 26 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Uruguay); 136.53. Eliminate the system of exit visas for those wishing to travel abroad (Chile); 136.54. Eliminate unjustified restrictions on the right to religious freedom and stop persecution of individuals for their peaceful religious activity (Austria); 136.55. Amend the Criminal Code in order to decriminalize missionary activities and to put an end to religious persecution of non-registered religious groups (Hungary); 136.56. Release immediately and rehabilitate all those human rights defenders, journalists, other civil society representatives, imprisoned without credible criminal charges (Slovakia); 136.57. End harassment and detention of persons who exercise their rights to freedom of assembly, association, expression and religion and release those currently held on such grounds (United States of America); 136.58. Guarantee, in its legislation, freedoms of expression, assembly and association; put an end to acts of violence and harassment against independent journalists and human rights defenders and release them, when appropriate (France). 137. The recommendations above, 136.1-136.3, 136.5-136.35, 136.38-136.40, 136.44, 136.49-136.53, and 136.55 did not enjoy the support of Uzbekistan, as it considers that they are not part of its obligations under internationally agreed human rights standards. 138. The recommendations above, 136.4, 136.36-136.37, 136.41-136.43, 136.45-136.48, 136.54, 136.56-136.58 did not enjoy the support of Uzbekistan as it considers them factually wrong. 139. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English only]   Composition of the delegation The delegation of Uzbekistan was headed by Akmal Saidov, Chairman of the National Human Rights Centre, and composed of the following members: • Mr. Esemurat Kanyazov, First Deputy Minister of Justice; • Mr. Batirjan Alimukhamedov, First Deputy Minister of Labour and Social Protection of Population; • Mr. Abdukarim Shodiyev, Deputy Minister of Internal Affairs; • Mrs. Tanzila Narbaeva, Chairperson of the Council of the Federation of Trade Unions of Uzbekistan.     