Distr.: General 7 April 2014 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-sixth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal  Periodic Review* Yemen * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.14-13150 *1413150* 
Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–114 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–19 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 20–114 5 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 115–118 14  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 26 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its eighteenth session from 27 January to 7 February 2014. The review of Yemen was held at the 6th meeting on 29 January 2014. The delegation of Yemen was headed by Hooria Mashhoyr Ahmed, Minister for Human Rights. At its 10th meeting held on 31 January 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on Yemen. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Yemen: the Congo, the Czech Republic and Viet Nam. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Yemen: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/YEM/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/YEM/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/YEM/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, the Czech Republic, Germany, Liechtenstein, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Island and the United States of America was transmitted to Yemen through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR). I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The head of the delegation expressed deep appreciation for the support for the respect, promotion and protection of human rights in Yemen demonstrated directly or indirectly by the international community. She also expressed appreciation for the follow-up by various treaty bodies.  6. The delegation stated that there had been substantial developments since the submission of the first UPR report in 2009. Key among them was the outbreak of the young people’s popular revolution as part of the Arab Spring events that began in late 2010 and persisted in diverse forms, with the people pitting themselves against forces fiercely determined to stifle change and prevent the attainment of desired goals. Those forces could never succeed, since the people had tasted freedom and sacrificed some of their finest offspring. The delegation counted on the continued support of the international community for the people’s choices and their right to systems of good governance that protected their rights and freedoms and achieved justice. 7. The delegation highlighted that the Working Group had no doubt  that the realization and promotion of human rights were closely linked to the rules and principles of good governance. While all such values were enshrined in Yemen’s heritage and culture, they had occasionally been abused or neglected in practice.  8. The delegation noted that the Government of National Reconciliation, formed in late 2011 following the signing of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, was inspired by the principles and values of the revolution and the international human rights standards reflected in Security Council resolutions 2014 and 2051 and incorporated in the Government programme for the transitional phase. The Government had called on the international community to assist it in meeting its humanitarian and development needs at that complex and difficult stage. The delegation urged Yemenis to support the political settlement and the national reconciliation. 9. The delegation stated that the cases of southern Yemen and Saada had been the most complex issues faced by the National Dialogue Conference due to the injustices that had been ongoing there for more than a decade. All parties and political and social forces had eventually reached a consensus on core issues, such as the type of State envisaged, the nature of the political system and the criteria for the distribution of wealth and power. A consensus had been reached on transitioning from a centralized State to a federal structure. A balanced distribution of power and wealth between the centre and the periphery would be specified in the new Constitution. 10. The delegation expressed pride at the successful conclusion of the National Dialogue Conference after ten months. It was fully aware that while some legal commitments had been fulfilled, the achievement of basic human rights in the period ahead presented major challenges in the areas of security, stability, construction and development. Work would now proceed on a new constitution focusing on good governance, the rule of law, the promotion of democracy and human rights. High priority would be given to those challenges by the Ministry of Human Rights, other government agencies with human rights responsibilities and civil society organizations, with the support of the regional and international communities and the United Nations. 11. The delegation highlighted the most important achievements outlined in its report, namely submission of the draft law on the national human rights institution based on the Paris Principles to the House of Representatives. It emphasized the important role played by advocacy and pressure by human rights bodies in ensuring the speedy enactment of laws, such as the Transitional Justice Act, accession to the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CPED) and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC). 12. The delegation emphasized that the Government had complied with its obligation regarding the marriageable age and stated that the bill was pending before Parliament. The House of Representatives was discussing the bill on human trafficking, and the Government would shortly submit bills on enforced disappearances, the Optional Protocol to CAT, the Protocol against trafficking in human beings and others aimed at the protection and promotion of human rights. 13. The delegation emphasized that priority attention was being given to the rights of marginalized and vulnerable groups such as women, children, people with disabilities, minorities and refugees. A Yemeni delegation had recently met with the Committee on the Rights of the Child to discuss the country’s third periodic report, and the Committee’s recommendations would be implemented. The eighth periodic report to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women was also due to be reviewed. The prominent participation of Yemeni women in public life was an important achievement, and women would doubtlessly make a significant contribution to public life in the future. Their role was currently based on constitutional guarantees and would eventually be reflected in other laws and public policies and programmes. 14. The Ministry of Human Rights and its partners in the Government and civil society had elaborated a national human rights strategy and a national strategy to combat trafficking. Preparations for the creation of a national observatory to monitor child rights violations were also under way. 15. Priority was being given to capacity-building programmes for human rights workers in the field of human rights and to the development of partnerships with civil society, the international community and the private sector. High priority was also being given to transparency and the fight against corruption, 16. Responding to concerns about outstanding benefits and obligations, the delegation stated that progress was being made in that regard, with the most significant being the appointment of members of the Independent Commission of Inquiry into the events of 2011 and the enactment of the Transitional Justice Act. It had been necessary to undertake measures reflecting the application of and approaches to transitional justice prior to the promulgation of the law, including the formation of committees to address land issues, the case of those forcibly dismissed from employment in the southern provinces after the 1994 war and the submission of apologies to the people of the south and of Saada for violations that had occurred in those regions. The Act would be considered in the light of national dialogue outcomes concerning the establishment of committees based on equity and reconciliation that would act in accordance with international norms of transitional justice. 17. According to the delegation, the Government had approved a comprehensive national strategy for combating terrorism based on respect for human rights. The existing draft law would be amended to include an accurate definition of terrorist crimes so that it would not be used abusively against political opponents. The National Dialogue Conference had demanded the cessation of the use of drones. The House of Representatives had adopted the same position and insisted that the means used to fight against terrorism should not harm civilians and should be based on human rights standards. The Government was preparing to receive detained citizens from Guantanamo, particularly those who had not been charged with terrorism, so that they could be rehabilitated and integrated into society. The United States of America had lifted restrictions on the detainees and authorized their return. Yemen would continue to fight terrorism, since it undermined development and greatly increased humanitarian requirements. 18. The delegation reaffirmed its determination to ensure respect for human rights despite the obstacles created by the legacy of past abuses and the continuing repercussions of capacity limitations. 19. The head of the delegation noted that Yemen had responded to the advance questions and inquiries submitted by Germany, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, Sweden, the United Kingdom, the United States, the Czech Republic, Belgium, Mexico, Norway, Slovenia and Spain. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 20. During the interactive dialogue, 78 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue can be found in section II of the present report. 21. Canada enquired about progress in ensuring access for women to education and equal treatment in custody cases, and in creating support mechanisms for divorcees and women victims of violence, particularly sexual violence. Canada made recommendations. 22. Chad noted considerable improvements in the human rights situation notwithstanding the ongoing disturbances. It also noted that the report had been prepared in consultation with all human rights institutions. Chad made recommendations. 23. Chile commended the progress made during the political transition, the commitment to promote and protect human rights and the efforts made to implement Human Rights Council resolutions. Chile made recommendations. 24. China appreciated the commitment for the promotion and protection of human rights and welcomed the protection of the rights of women, children and other vulnerable groups. China congratulated Yemen on the progress in the political transition and its efforts for economic development and security. China called on the international community to pay attention to the difficulties faced by Yemen and provide assistance accordingly. China made a recommendation. 25. Colombia welcomed the initiation of the process aimed at strengthening the rule of law, the institutional framework and democracy. Colombia made recommendations. 26. The Congo commended efforts to stabilize the sociopolitical and economic environment and encouraged Yemen to continue promoting national dialogue. It expressed concern about discrimination against women and girls and the situation of minors in conflict with the law, among others. The Congo made recommendations. 27. Cuba commended action to address existing challenges during the political transition, including the drafting and adoption of a new Constitution. It noted with satisfaction the reform of the legal system, the strengthening of the rule of law and measures to combat corruption. Cuba made recommendations. 28. The Czech Republic expressed concern about a number of human rights challenges that required urgent action. It made recommendations. 29. Denmark welcomed the human rights action plan and the recommendations of the National Dialogue Conference. It enquired about progress in removing juvenile prisoners from death row and implementing the National Action Plan for the eradication of female genital mutilation (FGM). It acknowledged the recommendation to introduce a minimum marriageable age of 18 years. Denmark made recommendations. 30. Djibouti commended the establishment of a national human rights institution based on the Paris Principles and the ratification of core international human rights treaties. Djibouti made recommendations. 31. Ecuador welcomed the adoption of the Action Plan on child labour, the creation of the Rehabilitation and Welfare Fund for Persons with Disabilities and efforts to promote immunization against, and eradication of, endemic and infectious diseases. Ecuador made recommendations. 32. Egypt appreciated the open approach in dealing with the international mechanisms for human rights over the past two years, in addition to the notable efforts to enhance the rights of women, children and people with disabilities. Egypt made recommendations. 33. Eritrea noted with satisfaction the ongoing efforts to restore peace and stability. Eritrea made recommendations. 34. Ethiopia commended the adoption of the Transitional Programme for Stabilization and Development and measures to strengthen the rule of law, reform the judicial system and combat corruption. It noted the progress made in primary education and in promoting gender parity in education. Ethiopia made recommendations. 35. France was pleased to note that the National Dialogue Conference had discussed the human rights situation and it supported efforts to promote a democratic political transition. France made recommendations. 36. Germany acknowledged the efforts to improve the human rights situation during the political transition and the successful conclusion of the National Dialogue Conference. Germany made recommendations. 37. Guatemala welcomed the holding of the National Dialogue Conference, the National Human Rights Conference and the National Conference for Women. It noted the measures taken to promote the participation of women in political and economic life and to end discrimination against women under domestic law. It was concerned about the lack of constitutional protection of children’s rights and of a clear and consistent definition of the child applicable in all legal texts. Guatemala made recommendations.  38. Indonesia commended efforts to ensure that the promotion and protection of human rights remained a key priority in the transitional process. It was pleased to note that the National Human Rights Institution Bill had been submitted to Parliament. Indonesia made recommendations. 39. Iraq welcomed the conclusion of the inclusive National Dialogue Conference and commended the development of the Transitional Program for Stabilization and Development and efforts made to combat financial and administrative corruption. Iraq made a recommendation. 40. Ireland expressed concern about the death penalty for juveniles, widespread malnutrition among children under five and the critical problem of stunting. It was concerned that a minimum marriageable age had not been set and that child marriage was a major factor in malnutrition and a root cause of female illiteracy. Ireland made recommendations. 41. Italy was concerned about the imposition of the death penalty, especially for non.violent crimes. It welcomed measures taken to increase women’s participation in public life and business. Italy made recommendations. 42. Japan hoped that the national dialogue would address transitional justice, promotion of women’s rights and the empowerment of women. It was concerned about unequal school enrolment rates for boys and girls, early marriage and reports of unlawful arrests and torture by law enforcement authorities. Japan made recommendations.  43. Jordan appreciated the Prime Minister’s approval on the draft law establishing a national human rights institution in addition to drafting a law against money-laundering and the financing of terrorism. Jordan also welcomed Yemen’s accession to CPED and the Rome Statute. Jordan made recommendations. 44. Kenya welcomed the ratification of human rights instruments, compliance with treaty reporting obligations and measures to enhance women’s role in society and decision-making processes. It encouraged Yemen to take further action in support of the participation of vulnerable and marginalized groups in all spheres of life. Kenya made a recommendation. 45. In response to questions concerning women, children, marginalized people and minorities, the head of the delegation said that Yemeni women had suffered from marginalization and major gender imbalances in education and political life. Yemeni women had played a high-profile role in the peaceful and popular youth revolution and were therefore difficult to ignore. They had acquired the strength and resilience to persist in their efforts to secure all their demands and rights. Yemen had taken steps to improve the status of Yemeni women and to actively involve them in all areas, but it was unable to meet all obligations pertaining to the establishment of full equality. Women represented 30 per cent of all components of the national dialogue and played a significant role in the process. 46. The delegation highlighted the effective participation of women in the National Dialogue Conference that had led to the adoption of a resolution requiring that women accounted for at least 30 per cent of all State authorities. That provision would enable women to participate effectively in the development process. Women were also represented in and sometimes led civil society organizations.  47. Many measures had been taken to protect girls from the dangers of early marriage and to specify the marriageable age. A bill setting the minimum age of 17 years had been approved by the House of Representatives in February 2009, but it had not yet been promulgated. Steps were being taken to promote its promulgation. The Government and NGOs had undertaken numerous activities aimed at raising awareness of the problem. The national dialogue outcomes were binding and required the House of Representatives to specify the marriageable age in the Personal Status Law. The head of the delegation was confident that that aim would be achieved with the backing of civil society, OHCHR, the international community and the global media.  48. The delegation highlighted the submission to the House of Representatives of the draft law on the independent human rights institution based on the Paris Principles. It stated that the law would definitely be enacted shortly, in coordination with the representatives and that there would be no objections from political parties. 49. With regard to the issue of violence against women and, in particular, FGM, the Government had agreed to conduct a study on gender-based violence, including against refugees. FGM was deemed to constitute violence against women and was a priority issue. The Government had suspended health workers who practised FGM. 50. The delegation highlighted the national dialogue outcomes as a contribution to the promotion of economic and social rights and the equal distribution of wealth and power. However, the Government faced many challenges, such as the high unemployment rate and poverty index. The adoption of a three-year national youth employment plan providing for more than 150,000 jobs had been adopted. The Transitional Programme for Stabilization and Development included a number of policies and action programmes that gave priority to the creation of employment opportunities for youth and the development of human resources. 51. A draft amendment to the Judicial Authority Act had been prepared to enhance the independence of the judiciary. It contained provisions designed to limit the powers of the Minister of Justice in matters relating to judges; to expand the powers of the Supreme Judicial Council; and to provide for the transfer of the functions of the Judicial Inspectorate and the Office of the Public Prosecutor to the Supreme Judicial Council. 52. Yemen was among 97 States that had not abolished the death penalty. It imposed the penalty for the most serious crimes, in line with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). There was no article in Yemeni law that authorized the imposition of the death penalty on juveniles. A committee had been established with the assistance of experts from Jordan to ensure that children were not executed. Of the 25 detainees on death row suspected of being children, only three had been found to be under 18 and their sentences had been revised, even though they had been ratified by the President and returned to the High Court. 53. A woman occupied the position of Vice-President of the Supreme Court. Women also headed appeal courts and held positions in the Juvenile Court. 54. Kuwait noted the difficulties Yemen facing regarding its stability and security and the positive steps taken during the national dialogue, which included all Yemenis, among them political parties and civil society organizations. Kuwait made a recommendation. 55. Latvia welcomed the recommendations of the National Dialogue Conference aimed at advancing the situation of women and encouraged Yemen to continue aligning its policies and legislation with relevant obligations under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). Latvia made recommendations. 56. Lebanon noted the submission to Parliament of the draft law on the establishment of a national human rights institution and the establishment of a national committee to combat trafficking in persons. Lebanon made recommendations. 57. Libya welcomed efforts made by the Ministry of Human Rights to establish a national human rights institution in compliance with Paris Principles and the development of national strategy for human rights. It welcomed the recommendations of the National Dialogue Conference. Libya made a recommendation. 58. Lithuania noted efforts to eliminate discrimination against women but remained concerned about honour killings and forced marriages. It was also concerned about the execution of juvenile offenders and about assaults on journalists and bloggers by public authorities and non-governmental groups. Lithuania made recommendations. 59. Malaysia noted the adoption of the Transitional Programme for Stabilization and Development and the efforts to establish an independent national human rights institution based on the Paris Principles. It commended the efforts to develop the National Human Rights Strategy. Malaysia made a recommendation. 60. The Maldives commended Yemen on its commitment to bringing peace and prosperity to its citizens and on its human rights progress, while urging it to address grievances and ensure that past atrocities were thoroughly investigated. It made recommendations. 61. Mauritania commended the ratification of a number of international conventions and optional protocols related to human rights, such as International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD), International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. Mauritania made recommendations. 62. Mexico noted efforts to establish a national human rights institution. It urged Yemen to give priority to respect for human rights in the new Constitution and in the forthcoming presidential elections. Mexico made recommendations. 63. Montenegro shared the concerns of the Human Rights Committee about the imposition of the death penalty for minors in Yemen. It asked whether steps had been taken to amend the Criminal Code to reduce capital punishment and abolish the death penalty for minors. Montenegro made recommendations. 64. Morocco commended the efforts taken towards drafting a law to establish an independent national institution for human rights in compliance with Paris Principles and the establishment of a national committee to combat trafficking in persons. It made a recommendation. 65. The Netherlands commended Yemen on successfully concluding the National Dialogue Conference, which included women and young persons. It welcomed the personal commitment of the Minister of Human Rights to establish a human rights framework and her active stance against child marriage. It made recommendations. 66. Nicaragua encouraged Yemen to take the results of the UPR review into account in the national dialogue, in which civil society, including women and young people, participated. Nicaragua made recommendations. 67. Norway welcomed the National Dialogue Conference, in which many women and young people participated. It was concerned about reports of discrimination and violence against those vulnerable groups and that a law proposing a minimum marital age had not yet been ratified by Parliament. Norway made recommendations. 68. Oman noted the efforts made to enhance and protect human rights by the development of many strategies and national plans to improve education, training and youth employment. Oman made a recommendation. 69. Pakistan commended the administrative and legal measures aimed at strengthening national institutions for the protection and promotion of human rights. It acknowledged the challenges, including poverty, unemployment and non-availability of health services. Pakistan made recommendations. 70. The Philippines was encouraged by the commitment to assisting refugees and migrants, despite resource constraints, and the continued upgrading of its institutions, policies and programmes to better promote and protect human rights. It lauded the inclusion of women and youth in the National Dialogue Conference. It made recommendations. 71. Poland commended progress achieved by the National Dialogue Conference and in universal primary education, gender parity and the refugee asylum process. It was concerned about the high number of executions and extrajudicial killings and reports of violence against vulnerable groups. Poland made recommendations. 72. Portugal noted efforts made by the Government to enhance the promotion and protection of human rights, especially within a framework of national reconciliation and institutional capacity-building. Portugal made recommendations. 73. Qatar congratulated Yemen on the success of the inclusive National Dialogue Conference in approving the national document and welcomed the efforts to develop the Transitional Program for Stabilization and Development (TPSD). Qatar made recommendations. 74. The Republic of Korea acknowledged the efforts to promote fundamental freedoms and enhance human rights, particularly through the National Dialogue Conference. The Government’s cooperation in the opening of the OHCHR office could serve as a model for other countries. It made recommendations. 75. Saudi Arabia commended Yemen’s cooperation in both the international and national spheres, including with the United Nations and praised the establishment of a committee to combat trafficking in persons. It made recommendations. 76. Senegal welcomed the efforts to enhance the protection and promotion of human rights and to implement the Transitional Programme for Stabilization and Development. It highlighted the programmes developed specifically for children with special needs and from poor backgrounds. Senegal made recommendations. 77. The delegation stated that the Transitional Justice Bill that had been withdrawn would be reconsidered in the light of the national dialogue outcomes. A committee established for the purpose had concluded that it would be based on equity and reconciliation in order to comply with international transitional justice standards.  78. In principle, Yemen always approved requests for visits by Special Rapporteurs. However, in view of the exceptional circumstances experienced by the country during the previous UPR cycle, requests had been deferred until the completion of the national dialogue. Yemen confirmed its readiness to welcome visits whenever the Special Rapporteurs saw fit. 79. Commenting on the country’s media and press, the head of the delegation stated that once the House of Representatives had concluded its consideration of the Audiovisual Media Bill, it would be possible to establish many private radio and television channels in addition to existing public and private channels. The Government had demonstrated a genuine willingness to promote and protect the freedoms of opinion and expression, the press and information, and the right of access to data. Some violations were attributable to influential people responding to criticism, but they did not reflect government policy or practice and judicial action was an option in such cases. 80. Singapore noted the efforts to strengthen the rule of law, reform the judiciary, improve living standards, support low-income households, particularly in rural areas and vulnerable groups, and set up training programmes for youth. Singapore made recommendations. 81. Slovakia asked what further measures were envisaged to abolish the death penalty for juveniles. It deplored the unsatisfactory situation of women, who continued to face discriminatory practices, and called for a more targeted approach. Slovakia made recommendations. 82. Slovenia, as a strong supporter of the abolition of the death penalty, was concerned that capital punishment for juvenile offenders was still imposed de facto and that child recruitment into the armed forces continued in Yemen. Slovenia made recommendations. 83. Somalia paid particular attention to social cohesion and stability in Yemen because they had a direct impact on Somalia. Somalia made recommendations. 84. Spain commended the Transitional Programme for Stabilization and Development, the National Human Rights Conference and the National Human Rights Strategy. It hoped that the new Constitution would incorporate fundamental rights and freedoms that would serve as the basis for lasting peace and stability. Spain made recommendations. 85. The State of Palestine welcomed the opening of the OHCHR office in Yemen and its readiness to cooperate with different United Nations mechanisms. Palestine also noted the steps taken to guarantee freedom of opinion and expression, progress in the field of education and to achieve gender equality. It made recommendations. 86. Sudan congratulated Yemen on the conclusion of the national dialogue process and praised Yemen for holding the first conference on human rights in December 2012 and for working to establish national monitoring mechanisms such as the national institution for human rights. Sudan made recommendations. 87. Sweden welcomed the work carried out by the Ministry of Human Rights to implement CEDAW. It requested further information on action being taken in that area, especially regarding discriminatory practices such as male guardianship. Sweden made recommendations. 88. Switzerland was concerned about discrimination against women in law and in practice, especially relating to marriage, divorce, child custody, inheritance and domestic violence. It noted that Yemen had recently expressed its readiness to join the ICC. Switzerland made recommendations. 89. Thailand welcomed the progress achieved in the National Dialogue Conference on priority issues. It noted the measures taken to address past abuses and the progress made in advancing the process. It appreciated the efforts to enhance women’s rights, but noted that challenges remained. Thailand made recommendations. 90. Tunisia welcomed the efforts to investigate the crimes of the past, the approval to establish an independent human rights institution and the opening of an OHCHR office in Yemen. Tunisia made recommendations. 91. Turkey commended the efforts to strengthen the role of women, establish the rule of law and combat poverty and corruption. It highlighted the establishment of a national human rights mechanism, increased partnership with civil society and positive legislative amendments. Turkey made a recommendation. 92. Turkmenistan welcomed the measures to strengthen the institutional infrastructure for the promotion of human rights and the establishment of the National Committee to Combat Human Trafficking. Turkmenistan made recommendations. 93. The United Arab Emirates commended the success of the inclusive National Dialogue Conference and the approval of the Government to establish an office for human rights in the same year. It made recommendations. 94. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland noted that significant human rights violations continued. It was concerned about the continued imposition of the death penalty, the illegal execution of minors and human rights violations by government forces. It made recommendations. 95. The United States of America encouraged Yemen to continue its efforts to ensure that women and youth remained empowered and engaged in the transitional processes and public life. It was concerned by violence against women and journalists, child recruitment into armed groups and continued imprisonment of persons detained by the former regime. It made recommendations. 96. Uruguay highlighted the progress made with regard to transitional justice and national reconciliation, the strengthening of the institutional framework for the promotion of human rights, action against human trafficking, new legislation in support of the rule of law and public policies designed to reduce the poverty index and the unemployment rate. Uruguay made recommendations. 97. Uzbekistan commended Yemen’s cooperation with the treaty bodies and the ratification of a number of human rights treaties. It welcomed the steps taken to strengthen the legal framework, the preparation of national strategies regarding human rights and to combat human trafficking and measures taken to establish a national human rights institution. Uzbekistan made recommendations. 98. Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) highlighted the major initiatives, particularly the national dialogue, aimed at promoting peace and reconciliation. Noting the willingness of Yemen to admit refugees from the Horn of Africa, it called on the international community to support such action. It made a recommendation. 99. Viet Nam commended Yemen on maintaining security and stability, transitional justice, further institutionalization of human rights mechanisms, improved social welfare, education and health care and its commitment to protecting the rights of vulnerable groups. It made recommendations. 100. Afghanistan appreciated the positive measures taken by Yemen, including the establishment of an independent national human rights mechanism, coordination of partnerships with government bodies, the private sector, international organizations and the donor community. Afghanistan made recommendations. 101. Algeria noted the legislative reforms since 2009 that comply with international standards to enhance human rights and the Government’s efforts, despite limited resources, to develop strategies and programs to develop economic, cultural and social rights. Algeria commended the procedures to enhance judicial independence and efficiency. Algeria made recommendations. 102. Argentina encouraged Yemen to continue promoting transitional justice and national reconciliation. It commended the establishment of the National Committee to Combat Human Trafficking and hoped that the bill on the subject would soon be adopted. Argentina made recommendations. 103. Australia observed that the transitional process afforded an opportunity to enhance human rights protection. It was concerned by the continued use of the death penalty, alleged violations by security forces and non-State actors and discrimination against women. Australia made recommendations. 104. Azerbaijan welcomed the measures and reforms to strengthen Yemen’s legal framework for promoting and protecting human rights, its partnerships with non.governmental mechanisms and civil society organizations and the establishment of a United Nations human rights office in Yemen. Azerbaijan made a recommendation. 105. Bahrain welcomed the holding of the first national conference for human rights on 9 and 10 December 2012. Bahrain welcomed the adoption of a number of measures and legal reforms to eliminate all forms of discrimination against women. Bahrain made recommendations. 106. Bangladesh commended the actions to strengthen institutions by the opening of human rights offices and by the establishment of general departments for human rights, family protection and women’s advancement within several ministries. It noted the progress made in increasing female school enrolment and the development of a strategy to increase women’s participation in the labour market.  107. Belgium welcomed the strengthened cooperation with United Nations mechanisms and the efforts to promote the role of women in society. It was concerned at the use of the death penalty and called for its abolition. Belgium made recommendations.  108. Bhutan commended Yemen on the establishment of the 2011 independent commission of inquiry into human rights abuses, the measures taken to eliminate discrimination against women and the exploitation of children. It noted poverty and unemployment were major challenges. Bhutan made a recommendation. 109. Botswana was concerned about the reports of human rights violations, including restrictions on freedom of expression, religion, association and peaceful assembly, torture, amputations, domestic violence, trafficking of women and children, use of child soldiers and arbitrary detentions. Botswana made recommendations. 110. Brazil commended the efforts towards transitional stabilization, restructuring the armed forces, ensuring broad-based political participation in the National Dialogue Conference and addressing the challenges of judicial independence. It encouraged continued efforts towards women’s empowerment and financial independence and combating human trafficking. Brazil made a recommendation. 111. The head of the delegation provided clarification regarding the protection of children from unlawful recruitment or use by the armed forces or armed groups, and stated that the procedures and status of implementation were being reviewed. A ministerial committee had been established to study decisions regarding measures to prohibit the involvement of children in armed conflict. Action had been taken to determine the age of children who had been recruited. Any underage member of the armed forces would be demobilized and rehabilitated. 112. Despite increased efforts in recent years to mainstream gender in educational development programmes, a range of social, economic, cultural and other factors continued to hamper the speedy emergence of an integrated educational renaissance that would meet the demands of development and eliminate the vast and persistent gender disparities in terms of access to basic education and further education at all levels. 113. With regard to the Millennium Development Goals, Yemen had established national plans to reduce poverty and ensure that universal primary education would be achieved on time. 114. The delegation reiterated its thanks and appreciation to the presidency of the session, representatives of Member States for the fruitful discussion during the interactive dialogue and the UPR secretariat for the excellent organization. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations** 115. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue and listed below enjoy the support of Yemen: 115.1 Ratify the Rome Statute of the ICC (Botswana ); 115.2 Accelerate its process to ratify the Rome Statute (Republic of Korea); 115.3 Ratify the Rome Statute that Yemen signed in 2000 and align legislation with all the obligations related to this text (France); 115.4 Ratify the Rome Statute and take necessary measures to ensure its implementation in the national legislation (Switzerland); 115.5 Ratify/accede to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and to implement it fully at national level and to accede to the Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of the Court (Slovakia);  115.6 Accelerate the legislative process for the rapid accession to the Rome Statute of the ICC and the Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of the ICC (Uruguay); 115.7 Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and fully align its legislation with all obligations under the Rome Statute, including incorporating the Rome Statute definition of crimes and general principles, as well as adopting provisions enabling cooperation with the Court (Latvia); 115.8 Ensure that security forces and non-State actors responsible for human rights abuses, including human rights violations in 2011, are investigated and, where appropriate, prosecuted, and ratify the Rome State of the International Criminal Court (Australia); 115.9 Lift the reservations to article 29 (1) of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) (Belgium); 115.10 Become party to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Australia); 115.11 Continue efforts towards the ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance as well as for those main international human rights instruments, to which the country is not yet party (Argentina); 115.12 Adopt national legislation prohibiting all domestic violence and discrimination in law and in fact against women and girls (Congo); ** The conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 115.13 Establish in law a minimum age for marital consent to put an end to early marriages of young girls (Spain); 115.14 Revise the law on marriage so that women and men are treated with equality in the state of marriage (Chad); 115.15 Adopt the new law proposing a minimum marital age as a matter of urgency and prohibit forced marriages in all cases (Norway); 115.16 Amend the Personal Status Law to bring it into conformity with international standards, that protection of women from domestic violence and investigations of violence within families be ensured, and forced marriage be prohibited in all cases (Czech Republic);  115.17 Amend the Press and Publication Act by repealing provisions that curtail journalists’ rights and prescribe excessive penalties (Lithuania); 115.18 Finalize the procedures of submitting the Bill on Human Trafficking to Parliament for discussion and the adoption at the earliest possible time (Bahrain); 115.19 Continue efforts to adopt and implement legislative and administrative measures for the promotion and protection of the rights of the child (Chile); 115.20 Spare no effort to expedite the guarantee of the rights of the child at the constitutional level (Guatemala); 115.21 Accelerate the establishment of a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principals (Tunisia); 115.22 Accelerate the process of establishing the national institution for the protection of human rights in conformity with the Paris Principles (Congo); 115.23 Accelerate legislative process to establish a national human rights institution in line with the Paris Principles, availing itself of the support and assistance of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (Uruguay); 115.24 Continue its efforts to establish an independent national human rights institution, in line with the Paris Principles and with a merit-based selection of board members and staff (Denmark);  115.25 Continue the procedure of establishing the national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Iraq);  115.26 Spare no effort to expedite the establishment of an independent national human rights institution (Guatemala); 115.27 Establish in the new Constitution guarantees in the field of human rights and implement a national strategy for human rights, supported by the creation of a national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (France); 115.28 Establish an independent national human rights institution in line with the Paris Principles and by strengthening results-based human rights monitoring throughout the country (Germany);  115.29 Take the necessary steps to complete the establishment of the national human rights institution, and make it fully functional, in line with the Paris Principles (Kenya); 115.30 Establish promptly a national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Nicaragua); 
115.31 Step up its efforts to establish its national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Philippines); 115.32 Further efforts to establish a national human rights institution in full compliance with the Paris Principles in order to deepen the scope of the human rights protection in the Republic of Yemen (Poland); 115.33 Adopt legislation, strategies, national action plans and initiatives and establish committees on human rights (Jordan); 115.34 Accelerate the nomination of members of the National Committee of Inquiry, as well as of the Reconciliation, Land and Public Administration Committees (Portugal); 115.35 Continue efforts to strengthen the institutional and legal basis in the area of the promotion and protection of human rights (Uzbekistan); 115.36 Take more proactive measures to further strengthen the human rights situation in the country and develop a mechanism to monitor and record human rights abuses (Afghanistan); 115.37 Continue the comprehensive reforms that Yemen committed to in the areas of building strong and effective institutions, strengthening the rule of law and promoting human rights (United Arab Emirates);  115.38 Establish and implement a comprehensive action plan to further improve and promote women’s rights (Republic of Korea); 115.39 Establish an institutional framework which protects the rights of the child and guarantees implementation of these rights (Senegal); 115.40 Continue further improvement of the protection and promotion of human rights in the country (Azerbaijan); 115.41 Disseminate human rights culture through training and awareness programs to the benefit of the law enforcement officials and to all segments of Yemeni society (Morocco); 115.42 Adopt all measures with a view to full compliance of national policy with its obligations under CEDAW (Slovakia);  115.43 Enhance cooperation with the United Nations treaty bodies system and special procedures, through implementation of the recommendations of the treaty bodies and the universal periodic review (Montenegro); 115.44 Strengthen its cooperation with the special procedures of the Human Rights Council by responding positively to the pending visit requests and eventually consider extending a standing invitation to all the special procedure mandate holders (Latvia); 115.45 Strengthen the cooperation between Yemen and the international human rights organizations, particularly the United Nations, and enhance interaction with the international and domestic civil society agencies (Egypt); 115.46 Ensure that men and women enjoy their human rights on an equal footing (Chad); 115.47 Take all necessary measures to ensure that women are not discriminated against (Czech Republic ); 
 115.48 Continue the efforts in the field of the promotion and protection of the rights of vulnerable groups of the population, particularly children, women and persons with disabilities (Djibouti); 115.49 Protect and promote the human rights of the entire population, particularly the most vulnerable groups such as women, children and minorities, and include these rights in the upcoming constitutional review process (Colombia); 115.50 Continue the efforts to ensure access to health care to all people throughout the territory of the country without any discrimination based on gender or social origin (Djibouti ); 115.51 Ensure that Yemeni women enjoy the same rights as men, promote their right to participate in political life on an equal footing with their male counterparts, and protect women against gender-based discrimination and violence (Switzerland); 115.52. Incorporate women in all aspects of political, economic and social life (Mauritania); 115.53 Take human rights into account in the constitutional process, particularly those of women and marginalized or vulnerable groups (Australia); 115.54 Revise its death penalty legislation so that it complies with ICCPR and particularly to ensure that the death penalty does not apply to minors (Slovenia); 115.55 Put an end by law to death by stoning and reduce the number of crimes that are punishable by the death penalty, excluding the death penalty for crimes related to drugs (Spain); 115.56 Respect the Convention on the Rights of the Child, to which Yemen is party, with regard to the death penalty (Belgium); 115.57 Reduce the number of crimes punishable by the death penalty in conformity with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which Yemen is party (Belgium); 115.58 Suspend executions of persons whose age is subject to doubt, having in mind the establishment of a special commission to determine the age of accused suspected of being a minor at the time of commitment of the crime (Spain); 115.59 Take measures to combat forced disappearances, collective arrests without a warrant and arbitrary detention without presentation of charges (Chile); 115.60 Further increase efforts in order to totally eradicate the recruitment or use of children by armed forces and armed groups (Italy); 115.61 Ensure the safety of children in particular through taking steps to protect them from taking part in armed conflicts (Eritrea); 115.62 End the recruitment and use of children in armed forces as a matter of priority by the government forces and the opposition armed groups and to release those who have already been recruited (Slovenia); 115.63 Fully implement the adopted action plan on the recruitment of children to the armed forces and take into consideration the relevant recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his annual report on children and armed conflict (Slovenia); 
115.64 Continue activities to protect and promote the rights of children by taking steps – such as implementing the Action Plan on Child Soldiers – to eliminate the unlawful recruitment and use of child soldiers (United States of America); 115.65 Bolster the investigation of cases of gender-based violence and violence against journalists (United States of America); 115.66 Better protect women and girls against all forms of violence, including domestic violence (Belgium); 115.67 Intensify efforts to end harmful traditional customs such as female genital mutilation and recruitment of child soldiers (Botswana); 115.68 Step up necessary measures to eradicate harmful traditional practices, especially those affecting girls, and those that are harmful to the physical and psychological well-being of children in general (Uruguay); 115.69 Spare no effort to expedite the eradication of the practice of female genital mutilation, availing itself of all existing measures at its disposal, such as criminal law, policies and awareness raising campaigns, among others (Guatemala); 115.70 Take effective action to end gender-based discrimination, to ensure full protection of women’s right, including by ending harmful practices such as female genital mutilation (FGM), and to criminalize domestic violence, including sexual abuse and martial rape (Germany);  115.71 Continue its efforts to build capacity in the field of gender-based violence within the police and other authorities and that the United Nations Security Council resolution 1325 agenda is included in such capacity-building efforts (Sweden); 115.72 Take measures to protect women and girls from domestic violence and to ensure that acts of such violence are fully investigated and those responsible are held accountable (Lithuania); 115.73 Step up efforts to put an end to discriminatory practices, such as FGM, and criminalize marital rape and domestic violence (Spain); 115.74 Adopt and implement further measures in order to contrast discrimination against women, prevent and punish episodes of violence against women and eradicate harmful practices such as female genital mutilations and early and forced marriages (Italy); 115.75 Ensure full respect for women’s rights and eliminate discriminatory practices, such as FGM, marital rape and other forms of domestic violence, in compliance with CEDAW (Thailand); 115.76 Continue the efforts aiming to eliminate all forms of discrimination and violence against women (Tunisia); 115.77 Publish clear instructions on the use of force during protests in compliance with international human rights standards and ensure that the training of law enforcement personnel incorporates best human rights practices (Czech Republic);  115.78 Establish an effective national monitoring system to ensure that throughout the process detainees are protected by the minimum safeguards for those deprived of their liberty, as provided for by international law (Mexico); 
115.79 Establish a commission to investigate the alleged human rights violations in 2011 and ensure that all perpetrators are brought to justice (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 115.80 Ensure that the performance and behaviour of the State security forces are brought into line with international law and that the State investigate and punish all abuses or disproportionate use of force, particularly in cases of peaceful protestors or civilian demonstrations (Mexico); 115.81 Conduct an independent, transparent and objective investigation to improve the human rights situation through the Commission of Inquiry (Maldives); 115.82 Put into operation this important mechanism, the Commission of Inquiry, including by expediting the appointment of its members to look into the 2011 events and bring those who committed human rights violation to account (Thailand); 115.83 Install a proper reconciliation and transitional justice framework in conformity with international standards and good practice and in line with the recommendations of the National Dialogue Conference and the report of the United Nations High Commissioner on Human Rights, including effective legislation on transitional justice and the appointment of members in the independent commission to investigate allegations of human rights violations committed by Government security forces during the events of 2011 (Netherlands); 115.84 Accelerate the issuance of the Transitional Justice Act and the National Reconciliation Act (Mauritania); 115.85 Continue its efforts for the speedy adoption and implementation of the laws on transitional justice and national reconciliation (Nicaragua); 115.86 Continue to strengthen the rule of law through the ongoing political transition, including by ensuring greater effectiveness and transparency in the judicial system (United States of America); 115.87 Strengthen the capacity of law enforcement personnel (Japan);  115.88 Proceed with the efforts aimed to restore security and achieve national reconciliation, as they are considered two conditions for any serious national project aiming to promote human rights (Algeria); 115.89 Adopt a more effective and stringent good governance policy (Mauritania); 115.90 Continue to strengthen the rule of law through judicial reform and improvement in law enforcement (Singapore); 115.91 Continue the national reconciliation endeavours in order to restore security and stability all over the country (Sudan); 115.92 Give further impetus to the reforms towards the rule of law, human rights and integrated economic development, thereby increasing national security, stability and welfare (Turkey);  115.93 Continue its efforts to foster an environment that harmonizes the exercise of  rights by its citizens with preserving the security and integrity of the country, as well as efforts to maintain public order and protect public and private property (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 115.94 Ensure that special attention is paid to cases where the age of alleged juvenile offenders is in dispute, while fully respecting international human rights law (Czech Republic); 115.95 Put an end to any form of discrimination against women, both in practice and in legislation, particularly those remaining in the Code of Personal Status (Belgium); 115.96 Continue the efforts to protect and promote the rights of women, in conformity with CEDAW, and implement the recommendations of the National Dialogue Conference (in particular, with regard to early marriages and participation of women in political life) (France); 115.97 Continue efforts to eradicate early marriage and take necessary measures to further promote girls’ education, including through enhancement of the educational system (Japan); 115.98 Consider the possibility of eliminating forced marriage (Ecuador); 115.99 Ensure that forced marriages are prohibited in all cases (Lithuania); 115.100 Take all necessary measures to abolish in practice cases of early and forced child marriages (Mexico); 115.101 Accelerate the drafting, adoption and implementation of laws to determine the age of marriage so as to do away with underage marriage (Viet Nam); 115.102 Take all necessary measures to effectively abolish early marriages, particularly in terms of prevention, awareness-raising, monitoring and punishment (Belgium); 115.103 Spare no effort to expedite the enactment and subsequent implementation of the law establishing the minimum age for marriage (Guatemala); 115.104 Implement the recommendation of its National Dialogue Conference to set the minimum marriage age at 18 years in line with its obligation under the Convention on the Rights of the Child to take measures with a view to abolishing practices detrimental to the health of children (Netherlands); 115.105 Take urgent steps to follow up on the recommendation which was made at the National Dialogue Conference for a universal minimum age of marriage of 18 years and ensure that an appropriate legal framework is put in place to prevent marriage for children under the age of 18 (Denmark);  115.106 Take effective measures to end the practice of early, forced and child marriage, including by setting a minimum marriage age of 18 years for both genders (Germany);  115.107 Adopt and implement legislation setting the minimum age of marriage at 18 years, as recommended by the National Dialogue Conference, and raise awareness of the negative effects of child marriage (Ireland); 115.108 Incorporate the proposed recommendation of the National Dialogue Conference, to set the minimum age for marriage at 18 years for men and women equally in the Yemeni legislation (Libya); 115.109 Continue working in order to guarantee the human rights of its citizens and the strengthening of the democratic model that is adopted by its people (Cuba); 115.110 Take all necessary measures to protect journalists, particularly by prosecuting perpetrators of violence or intimidations against them. (France); 
115.111 Ensure fulfilment of recommendations accepted by Yemen during its previous UPR to cease threats against journalists, to take steps to guarantee and promote freedom of expression and to amend and enforce the Press and Publication Act (Canada); 115.112 Take appropriate measures to ensure the lives and security of journalists and human rights defenders (Colombia); 115.113 Ensure prompt and effective investigation of intimidation and threats against journalists (Lithuania); 115.114 Continue to implement the Press and Publication Act in accordance with international standards (State of Palestine); 115.115 Ensure full protection and realization of the right to freedom of expression as well as the right to peacefully assembly and association in accordance with international human rights standards (Czech Republic);  115.116 Adopt appropriate measures to disseminate widely and ensure full observance of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders (Norway); 115.117 Pursue efforts to ensure the representation of women at all levels of the political process and their participation in public life without discrimination or intimidation (Chile); 115.118 Continue strengthening women’s participation in society and in decision-making processes (Bahrain); 115.119 Take measures to improve women’s participation in the political process and the various aspects of life (Pakistan); 115.120 Invite women and other marginalized sectors to participate in other government consultative bodies (Philippines); 115.121 Continue its efforts to protect and promote women’s rights, including giving due considerations to the applications of quota system in all State bodies as put forwarded by the National Conference for Women (Indonesia);  115.122 Proceed with the national policies aimed to promote women’s position in the society and to achieve better representation in the elected councils (Algeria); 115.123 Ensure that adequate resources, political commitment and support be given in preparation for the upcoming presidential and parliamentary elections in 2014, which must be held in a free, fair and transparent manner and in accordance with international standards (Maldives); 115.124 Continue efforts by the Government to ensure the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights, especially medical care and education, despite the difficulties and challenges identified in its national report (Cuba); 115.125 Prioritize combating poverty and unemployment, which are two essential issues to promote social and economic rights, which necessitate the support of the international community and its relevant institutions (Lebanon); 115.126 Continue its efforts to adopt programs and projects to combat poverty and reduce unemployment (Pakistan); 115.127 Strengthen the national efforts to eradicate poverty and its consequences and to limit the phenomenon of non-employment in collaboration with the relevant regional organizations (Sudan); 
115.128 Continue the practice of implementing programs aimed at further improving the welfare of the population (Turkmenistan); 115.129 Continue to work with and seek the support of the international community for technical and financial assistance to overcome grave challenges of poverty and unemployment (Bhutan); 115.130 In cooperation with ILO and other relevant international organizations, continue to provide vocational training, especially for the youth, to build up a skilled workforce to support its development (Singapore); 115.131 Continue with its efforts aiming to promote and protect economic and social rights (Jordan); 115.132 Urge the international agencies to support the efforts of the Government of Yemen in combating poverty, reducing unemployment and improving the level of food security (Kuwait); 115.133 Speed up the efforts of poverty reduction with the assistance of the international community to provide its people with social protection (China); 115.134 Redouble its efforts to meet socioeconomic needs of its citizens (Eritrea); 115.135 Strengthen policies and programmes to combat poverty and social inequalities (Senegal); 115.136 Boost the process of adopting and implementing strategies and projects to combat poverty (Viet Nam); 115.137 Step up its efforts towards the implementation of intersectoral policies with a view to eradicating poverty (Brazil); 115.138 Continue to strengthen regional and international cooperation in order to balance the provision of humanitarian assistance and socioeconomic development among the autochthonous and the huge number of refugees (Somalia); 115.139 Step up measures to achieve MDGs (Uzbekistan); 115.140 Adopt a comprehensive strategy which is grounded in human rights principles, in particular non-discrimination and equality, to combat malnutrition and further reduce the mortality rates of children under five (Ireland); 115.141 Continue its efforts to strengthen the educational and health sectors and raise awareness regarding human rights issues (Oman); 115.142 Further secure girls’ access to education, particularly in rural areas; as well as facilitate women’s participation in the political, economic and social processes (Viet Nam); 115.143 Promptly investigate any continued allegations of child, early and forced marriage, especially in the case of young girls, and undertake measures to prevent girls from being forced to withdraw from school (Canada);  115.144 Take necessary measures to promote girls’ access to education, particularly in rural areas (Pakistan); 115.145 Continue the efforts of reforming the educational sector and reducing illiteracy, especially among women (Egypt); 
115.146 Strengthen the access to primary education for all segments, particularly women (Lebanon); 115.147 Continue the efforts to enhance women’s education through the effective programmes adopted by the Yemeni Government (Qatar);  115.148 Continue actions to improve the quality of education (Ecuador); 115.149 Continue its efforts in improving access, enrolment and quality of education in the country, including through the allocation of adequate financial resources (Indonesia);  115.150 Place additional efforts and attention to primary education, especially in rural areas (Saudi Arabia); 115.151 Continue to implement the National Basic Education Development Strategy, especially in the areas of enrolment and improvement of quality of education (State of Palestine); 115.152 Speed up the process of implementing the Compulsory Education Law (Afghanistan); 115.153 Continue the support, care and the rehabilitation of disabled persons and those with special needs, and continue to support them directly or through associations and specialized rehabilitation centres (Qatar); 115.154 Build legislative and organizational capacities and support the capacity-building processes in public agencies, concerned with asylum and immigration (Saudi Arabia);  115.155 Take further measures to protect the human rights of migrants (Ethiopia); 115.156 Continue to build up its engagement with its international and regional partners in order to better assist transiting refugees and migrants (Philippines); 115.157 Continue to promote and protect effectively, in law and in practice, the human rights of women and of internally displaced persons (Colombia); 115.158 Take further measures to protect human health in the context of ensuring effective ways of sustainable development (Turkmenistan); 115.159 Implement all the recommendations of the United Nations Committee against Torture (France); 115.160 Implement the guidance and the recommendations of the National Conference on Human Rights, which took place from 9 to 10 December 2012 (Congo); 115.161 Continue in its efforts to implement accepted recommendations of the first cycle of the UPR working group (Ethiopia); 115.162 Continue its positive efforts in promoting and protecting the human rights of its people (Malaysia); 115.163 Continue practical efforts to improve the overall human rights situation in the country by strengthening, inter alia, its effective bilateral and multilateral cooperation (Somalia); 115.164 Continue its reform process with all possible financial and technical assistance from the regional and international community and relevant agencies for the political, economic and social uplift of its citizens (Somalia); 
115.165 Call on the international community to intensify their support and assistance to enable it to overcome the challenges and obstacles it faces during the implementation of its human rights policies, as stated in paragraph 131 of its national report. (United Arab Emirates); 115.166 Continue to enhance the human rights system according to the universally agreed principles, and refuse the imposition of values outside the legally agreed framework (Egypt). 116. Yemen considers that recommendation 115.10 above has already been implemented. 117. The following recommendations will be examined by Yemen, which will respond in due course, but no later than the twenty-sixth session of the Human Rights Council in June 2014.  117.1 Ratify OP-CAT (Denmark); 117.2 Ratify, as a priority, the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto, as well as the Rome Statute of the ICC, and consequently to fully align its national legislation with all obligations under the Rome Statute (Slovenia); 117.3 Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Rights of Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families and ILO Convention No. 189 (Philippines); 117.4 Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to ICESCR and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Portugal); 117.5 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, the Rome Statute and the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Tunisia); 117.6 Become party to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Australia); 117.7 Review legislation on the death penalty in order to eliminate the use of the death penalty, including stoning, as well as ratify the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR and comply with the provisions of article 6, paragraph 5, of the Covenant on crimes committed by persons under the age of 18 (Uruguay); 117.8 Ensure full compliance with international standards on the death penalty, but ultimately establish a moratorium with a view to ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Australia); 117.9 Issue a standing invitation to all mandate holders of the Human Rights Council (Tunisia); 117.10 Impose a moratorium on the death penalty with a view to abolishing the capital punishment. Further with regards to numerous cases of juvenile offenders facing the death penalty (Czech Republic);  117.11 Announce a moratorium on the death penalty with a view to its eventual abolition. Pending this, Germany recommends taking appropriate steps to reduce its application, to respect international minimum standards and, in particular, to ensure that the death penalty is not imposed on persons under the age of 18 at the time of infringing penal law. Due process of law should be guaranteed in all judicial proceedings (Germany);  117.12 Comply with the minimum international standards regarding capital executions, also by further implementing the already existing national legislation that protects juveniles and mentally impaired from being sentenced to death (Italy); 117.13 Establish a moratorium on the use of the death penalty with a view to its abolition and, in the meantime, immediately stop imposing the death penalty on anyone under the age of 18 (Lithuania); 117.14 Establish immediately a moratorium on the death penalty as a first step towards the complete abolition of the capital punishment (Switzerland); 117.15 Establish an official moratorium on the use of the death penalty (Montenegro); 117.16 Impose a moratorium on the execution of death sentences (Sweden); 117.17 Implement a moratorium on the use of the capital punishment with a view to its abolition (Portugal); 117.18 Abolish the death penalty for all persons considered as minors under international law (Switzerland); 117.19 Introduce an immediate moratorium on executions with the intention of abolishing the death penalty and improve methods to accurately determine the ages of all defendants, such as by improving birth registration rates (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 117.20 Consider establishing a moratorium on the death penalty with the view to its later abolition, above all in cases involving minors and those guilty of non-lethal offences (Mexico); 117.21 Consider a formal moratorium on executions of all persons condemned with the death penalty and examine the possibility of abolishing the death penalty (Argentina); 117.22 Adhere to the global trend against the capital punishment by establishing, as a first step, a moratorium on its use (Poland); 117.23 Refrain from sentencing minors to death, in accordance with their international treaty obligations, and ultimately abolish the death penalty altogether (Norway); 117.24 Strengthen the role of the technical committee on legal medicine in order to avoid any death sentences to minors, and establish a moratorium on executions from the perspective of the final abolition of the death penalty (France); 117.25 Actively promote and ensure marginalized and vulnerable groups are both effectively and meaningfully involved in the national reconciliation process (Portugal). 118. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as being endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex 
[English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of Yemen was headed by Her Excellency, Ms. Hooria Mashhoyr Ahmed, Minister for Human Rights, and composed of the following members: • H.E. Dr. Ali M. Majawar, Ambassador, Permanent Representative • Judge Abdullah	 Mahyoob Al-Yousoufi, First Lawyer, Office of the General 
Attorney, Member of the Technical Committee 
• Dr. Shafiqa Saeed, Chairperson of the National Commission for Women • Mr. Ali Saleh Abdullah, Deputy Minister of Social Affairs and Labour • Dr. Mohamed Al-Hawi, Deputy Minister of Planning and International Cooperation • Mr. Mohamed Al-Maqtari, Deputy Minister of Legal Affairs • Mr. Mohamed Al-Foqumi, Deputy Permanent Representative • Mr. Abdullah Al-Aleemi, Chairman of the Department of Human Rights, Office of 
the Presidency 
• General Omar Bin Hulays, Director General of Human Rights, Ministry of Interior • Dr. Yahya 	Al-Khazzan, Head of Conferences and International Cooperation, 
Ministry of Justice 
• Mr. Awsan Abdullah Al-Aud, Ministry of Foreign Affairs • Mr. Manaf Al-Salahi, Director General Of International Organizations and Reports 
Ministry of Human Rights 
• Mr. Saddam 	Al-Qufaili, Director of International Reports, Ministry of Human 
Rights 
• Mr. Suleiman Tabrizi, Director of the Department of International Organizations, 
Ministry of Human Rights 
• Awsan Alaud, First Secretary, Human Rights Officer • Mr. Jamal Al-Wadei, Third Secretary in the Mission • Mr. Hussein Al-Ashwal, Third Secretary in the Mission. 