Distr.: General 8 July 2013 English Original: English/French General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-fourth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Burkina Faso * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Contents 
Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–134 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–30 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 31–134 6 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 135–139 15 
III. Voluntary pledges and commitments...................................................................... 140 26  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 27 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review (UPR), established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its sixteenth session from 22 April to 3 May 2013. The review of Burkina Faso was held at the 2nd meeting on 22 April 2013. The delegation of Burkina Faso was headed by Ms. Julie Prudence Somda-Nigna, Minister for Human Rights and Civil Promotion. At its 10th meeting held on 26 April 2013, the Working Group adopted the report on Burkina Faso. 2. On 14 January 2013, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Burkina Faso: Benin, Indonesia and Ireland. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Burkina Faso: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/BFA/1); (b) A compilation prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/BFA/2 and Corr.1); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/BFA/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Mexico, Montenegro, Slovenia, Spain and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Burkina Faso through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the UPR. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. Ms. Julie Somda-Nigna, Minister for Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility of Burkina Faso, said that the delegation of Burkina Faso was pleased to submit the second report of Burkina Faso to the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review. She said that the multi-institutional composition of the delegation would facilitate open and fruitful dialogue. She noted that the universal periodic review, based on periodic evaluation of implemented policies and measures and on reaffirmation of commitments, was consistent with her country’s policy of promoting and protecting human rights. 6. She noted that the report was a consensus document that had been prepared on a participatory and inclusive basis, and described human rights developments in Burkina Faso since the previous review. 7. Outlining changes in the normative framework, she said that several laws had been enacted in order to bring national legislation into line with international human rights standards. There were also plans to reform criminal law in Burkina Faso, including a review of the Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure, in order to take account of human rights concerns. 8. Institutional-level reforms had involved harmonization of the National Human Rights Commission and the Paris Principles,1 the establishment of the office of political opposition leader, the creation of the National Council to Combat Female Circumcision, the establishment of the National Council for the Advancement of Women and capacity-building of the Higher State Supervisory Authority. Forums for dialogue and consultation had also been established. 9. The delegation added that a national strategy to promote a culture of peace and tolerance had been adopted with the aim of promoting peaceful coexistence between communities and religions. Furthermore, the President of Burkina Faso had been deeply involved in peace processes in Africa through mediation in several conflicts. 10. Regarding development policies, the Strategy for Accelerated Growth and Sustainable Development had been adopted with the aim of enhancing the productivity of the country’s economy and improving the people’s standard of living. 11. Concerning international instruments, Burkina Faso had ratified some of the international conventions listed in its report but was aware that it needed to make further efforts to ratify the others, in particular the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty. 12. The delegation also announced that information activities had been organized for the public, that a national monitoring committee had been established and a national action plan adopted. On the issue of compliance with its international obligations, Burkina Faso had presented or submitted reports to the treaty bodies listed in its report. 13. Many other activities were carried out in the areas of education, justice, and human rights protection and promotion with the aim of improving the human rights situation on the ground. However, constraints and challenges remained – in particular, the persistence of certain harmful traditional practices, illiteracy, growing antisocial behaviour, ignorance of laws, poverty and limited State resources. 14. The main challenge remained the continued promotion and protection of human rights through the implementation of the national policy on human rights and the promotion of civic responsibility and its related action plan. 15. Concerning the written questions, the delegation provided the following replies. 16. With regard to strengthening the framework for the legal protection of human rights, interministerial consultations were under way to bring national legislation into line with international standards and to ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. 17. As to cooperation with the special procedures, Burkina Faso had reiterated its willingness to welcome any request for a visit addressed by the special procedures, as it had already done in the past. 18. Regarding children’s rights, the Government had established a national committee to monitor the fight against trafficking in persons and related practices and strengthened its activities to provide information, training and awareness-raising to certain stakeholders with the aim of remedying the lack of information. Corporal punishment was strictly prohibited in schools, training centres and even in the home. As to child labour in gold mines, mining licence holders were required to prohibit children’s access to sites for which they were responsible. 19. With respect to women’s rights, a law on women accused of witchcraft was in the process of being adopted with the aim of punishing violence against such women and facilitating their reintegration into their original communities. A law on gender quotas had been adopted to promote women’s participation in civic affairs. 20. In the area of employment promotion, a special job creation programme for young people and women had achieved significant results. 21. Regarding the situation of persons with disabilities, Burkina Faso had ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and adopted a specific law to implement it. Furthermore, a 2012 decree establishing social measures for persons with disabilities provided for 10 per cent of jobs to be set aside for them in the civil service and State institutions. A consultation framework bringing together stakeholders involved in promoting the rights of persons with disabilities had also been established. 22. Concerning the right to education, several measures had been taken, including the abolition of school fees, the provision of textbooks and school supplies to all primary schoolchildren, and the capping of secondary school fees. Children not enrolled in schools and dropouts were taken care of in newly opened non-formal basic education centres. Civil society partners were also involved in providing non-formal education to teenagers. 23. As to the right to health, the National Health Development Plan had been implemented and action was being taken to combat certain diseases. The delegation drew attention to the personal involvement of the Head of State in the fight against HIV/AIDS and the provision of free care for persons living with HIV. Health in the mines was another of the Government’s concerns. 24. At the judicial level, following the 2011 crisis, some law enforcement officials had been dismissed as a result of a disciplinary procedure, and judicial proceedings had been initiated against those who had committed human rights violations. 25. Reforms were under way to strengthen the independence of the judiciary. Moreover, measures had been taken to promote access to justice and address prison overcrowding by building new courts and prisons, implementing alternatives to imprisonment, and providing assistance to disadvantaged people in judicial proceedings. 26. On the issue of press freedom, the establishment of the press card improved the protection of journalists and media plurality was effective. 27. With regard to accommodation, the Government had established a building permit facilitation centre to reduce time and costs and adopted a national programme for the construction of social housing. 28. Concerning the right of people to an adequate standard of living, an early warning system had been set up to gather and analyse information with a view to preventing any situation that might affect food security. 29. Regarding property matters, the National Policy on Land Security in Rural Areas and the Act on Rural Land Tenure recognized the rights of all producers, including vulnerable groups. 30. The delegation also noted that the objectives of the universal periodic review would be fully achieved only if all States cooperated to strengthen the mechanism. Lastly, it thanked the members of the troika — Benin, Indonesia and Ireland — and also the delegations and all stakeholders that had significantly contributed to the review of Burkina Faso. 1 	Principles relating to the status of national institutions, General Assembly resolution 48/134 of 20 December 1993. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 31. During the interactive dialogue, 84 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 32. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland welcomed the continuing death penalty moratorium, and called for the abolition of the death penalty. It called for improved access to the justice system and the eradication of harmful cultural practices. It asked about the operation of the National Human Rights Commission, and government support thereto. It made recommendations. 33. The United States of America commended the establishment of the Ministry of Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility, and the adoption of the National Action Plan to eliminate child labour. It remained concerned about child labour and trafficking, and poor enforcement of labour laws. It also expressed concern about arbitrary arrests and detentions, the lack of fair trials and the mistreatment of detainees. It made recommendations. 34. Uruguay noted the ratification of international instruments, and the establishment of the Ministry of Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility, the National Human Rights Commission and the National Council of Civil Society Organizations. Uruguay made recommendations. 35. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela welcomed the creation of the National Human Rights Commission and the Ministry of Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility, the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and the death penalty moratorium. It noted improved school attendance and maternal and child health. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela made recommendations. 36. Viet Nam noted the implementation of past recommendations and institutional reform, including the creation of the Ministry of Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility. It particularly noted efforts to create jobs for women and young people, and to promote gender equality. It made recommendations. 37. Zambia acknowledged the implementation of past recommendations, including ratification of regional and international instruments and the precedence of those instruments over national laws. Support was required to overcome poverty, corruption and mismanagement of resources. Zambia called for international assistance to enable Burkina Faso to realize its human rights priorities. 38. Algeria commended Burkina Faso for the progress attained, including the creation of the Ministry of Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility, the National Human Rights Commission, the National Committee to Combat Female Circumcision, and national policies on gender, job creation and health. Algeria made recommendations. 39. Angola welcomed the promotion of good governance and democratic process. It noted the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the UNESCO Convention on Discrimination in Education, the establishment of the Ministry of Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility and the National Human Rights Commission, and the follow-up of past recommendations. 40. Argentina welcomed the creation of the Ministry of Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility and the National Human Rights Commission. Argentina made recommendations. 41. Armenia noted the creation of the Ministry of Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility and other initiatives. It recognized increased literacy and free obligatory primary education. Violence and discrimination against women was of concern. Armenia made recommendations. 42. Australia welcomed the role of Burkina Faso as the chief peace negotiator for many of the conflicts in the region. It commended Burkina Faso for investigating election-related violence. Australia also expressed concern by reports of a lack of due process and allegations of arbitrary arrests, torture and ill-treatment by the security forces. Trafficking and exploitation of women and children remained a concern. Australia made recommendations. 43. Austria acknowledged the creation of the Ministry of Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility and the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. It was concerned about child labour in agriculture and gold mining and poor judicial process. It enquired about what was being done to protect women from discrimination. Austria made recommendations. 44. Azerbaijan welcomed political reforms and accession to human rights instruments, including establishing the National Human Rights Commission and the Ministry of Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility. Azerbaijan made a recommendation. 45. Bangladesh acknowledged ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and adoption of the National Health Development Plan 2011–2020. It noted concerns about the situation of women, child mortality and education, as well as the need for a related comprehensive strategy and better gender equality. 46. Belarus welcomed the ratification of international instruments, the focus on combating trafficking and efforts to eradicate challenges to human rights. Belarus made recommendations. 47. Belgium welcomed improved women’s and children’s rights, the creation of the National Council for the Advancement of Women and a national action plan on child trafficking and abuse, and asked about specific measures in place. Existing instruments against violence should be implemented. The death penalty remained. Belgium made recommendations. 48. Benin acknowledged the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance. Burkina Faso played a key role in democracy. It welcomed improved capacity, job creation and the national microfinancing strategy. The death penalty should be abolished. 49. Botswana commended Burkina Faso for the implementation of recommendations, and the creation of regional directorates and counselling and documentation centres. It welcomed the national policy on human rights, the job creation programme and the national health policy. It asked about measures taken with regard to female genital mutilation (FGM), social exclusion and women’s land rights. Botswana made a recommendation. 50. Brazil welcomed the creation of the National Committee to Combat Female Circumcision and steps to abolish the death penalty. It expressed concern regarding discrimination of women and child labour. Brazil made recommendations. 51. Burundi commended the implementation of past recommendations, the creation of a Ministry for Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility, the adoption of a decree on the appointment of Commissioners to the National Human Rights Commission. It made recommendations. 52. Canada noted the existence of two draft laws on torture, and asked about their status, as well as planned specific measures to eradicate torture. As maternal health was a priority, it noted the poor quality of health services for women. Canada made recommendations. 53. Cape Verde acknowledged the improved internal normative framework, including an anti-trafficking law, a child trafficking action plan, the Labour Code, child rights legislation, the National Committee to Combat Female Circumcision and the zero tolerance action plan on FGM. It welcomed reduced illiteracy. It made recommendations. 54. Chad noted the implementation of past UPR recommendations, institutional and normative reforms, and the establishment of a national human rights institution, as well as dialogue with the leader of the political opposition. It welcomed education on human rights and the ratification of international instruments. 55. Chile welcomed progress in implementing recommendations and normative and institutional reform, notably ratification of the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education. Chile made recommendations. 56. The Congo commended, amongst others, the creation of a human rights Ministry and the National Human Rights Commission, and policies on FGM and gender equality. It asked the Human Rights Council and the human rights mechanisms to provide technical assistance to Burkina Faso. 57. Costa Rica noted human rights awareness-raising campaigns, progress towards universal education and increased primary school attendance. It remained concerned at harmful practices and violence against women. Costa Rica made recommendations. 58. Côte d’Ivoire welcomed the established action plan to implement UPR recommendations, the improved situation of women and children, plans to eradicate maternal and neonatal mortality, and the national microfinancing strategy. It regretted that women accused of witchcraft were discriminated against. It made a recommendation. 59. Cuba recognized the focus on combating HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted diseases, improving health and education coverage and eradicating impunity. It welcomed the Programme for Strategic Development in Basic Education 2012–2021 and the National Action Plan on Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility 2012–2022. Cuba made recommendations. 60. Cyprus welcomed the ratification of the UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education, the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Challenges remained in children’s rights, despite the adoption of a strategic policy framework, the establishment of a National Council and a reporting hotline. Cyprus made a recommendation. 61. The Democratic Republic of the Congo noted legislation on improving economic and social rights, the ratification of international conventions and the creation of national structures. It asked about measures to eradicate female circumcision and the population’s reaction to abolishing the death penalty. It made recommendations. 62. On the issue of birth registration, the delegation said that Burkina Faso had adopted an action plan to ensure that children were duly registered at birth. The plan was piloted by the Ministry of Territorial Administration and Security, in cooperation with the Ministry of Human Rights and the Ministry for the Advancement of Women. Steps were being taken to secure the necessary funding for implementation of the plan. 63. The delegation explained that the National Human Rights Commission was now governed by legislation bringing it into line with the Paris Principles. It thus enjoyed managerial and operational autonomy. The delegation expressed the Government’s willingness to provide it with the resources necessary for its operation, while recalling that it was for the Commission to work freely to develop its credibility, to secure its position within the institutional landscape and to be accredited with the competent bodies. 64. In response to the concerns expressed regarding the question of the abolition of the death penalty, the delegation emphasized that, given the rise in organized crime in the country, national opinion did not support abolition. 65. As to the fight against corruption, the delegation emphasized that it was one of the State’s priorities. The Head of Government had thus taken strong measures to prevent and curb corruption, and the files concerning the persons referred to in the reports of the supervisory bodies such as the Court of Auditors and the Higher State Supervisory Authority had been forwarded to the courts for the purpose of prosecution. 66. Regarding corporal punishment, the delegation stated that it was prohibited by national law, both at school and in families. A free helpline had also been set up to report cases of violence against children. However, since victims were reluctant to report such practices, it was difficult to provide concrete answers, particularly concerning cases of domestic violence. 67. With respect to the promotion and protection of women’s rights, the delegation referred to the important education and awareness-raising activities that had been conducted for the various social and professional groups. While the activities had achieved significant results, a number of social and cultural constraints remained; hence the need to strengthen human rights education. 68. Concerning the fight against the worst forms of child labour, it pointed out that the Government had taken several measures. Since 2012, mining licence holders had thus been required to prohibit children’s access to mines for which they were responsible. 69. The following were planned for 2013: ongoing activities to raise public awareness; the removal of, and care for, at least 20,000 children in gold mines in the central-northern, Sahel, central plateau and south-western regions, and in the Pissy quarry in Ouagadougou; economic empowerment of children’s families through subsidies for income-generating activities, with the aim of keeping children in their families; and the launch of a project supported by the Government of the United States, entitled “Reducing child labour through education and services in Burkina Faso”, in the Cascades, Hauts Bassins and Boucle du Mouhoun regions, aimed at 10,000 beneficiaries over a four-year period. 70. With regard to child domestic workers, particularly girls, the Ministry of Social Action and National Solidarity had conducted campaigns to raise people’s awareness of their rights, in cooperation with the NGO Terre des Hommes. 71. The Working conditions of domestic workers were established by decree. 72. Regarding children working in cotton fields, a study had been carried out with a view to improving their care. 73. As to the fight against child trafficking, a decree on the responsibilities, operation and composition of a national committee to monitor the fight against trafficking in persons and related practices had been adopted. In accordance with the decree, national monitoring committees existed on the ground at the regional and departmental levels and were effectively combating child trafficking. 74. Denmark noted that FGM remained widespread, despite a zero tolerance policy. It welcomed the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, noting that torture and other cruel treatment remained in detention centres and prisons. It asked about the accreditation process for the National Human Rights Commission. Denmark made recommendations. 75. Djibouti welcomed the national action plan 2009–2013 of zero tolerance of FGM and the national strategy for protection and promotion of persons with disabilities. It asked the international community and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights to assist Burkina Faso in the implementation of the UPR recommendations. Djibouti made recommendations. 76. Egypt commended the creation of the Ministry of Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility, the National Council of Civil Society Organizations and the National Council for the Advancement of Women. Egypt made recommendations. 77. Ethiopia welcomed the National Policy on Human Rights, the introduction of free birth certificate issuance and the Consultative Council for Political Reforms. Efforts should continue to ensure gender equality and fight harmful traditional practices. Ethiopia made recommendations. 78. Finland noted that despite the criminalization of FGM and the establishment of the National Committee to Combat Female Circumcision, FGM remained widespread. It asked what measures were being taken to bring offenders to justice. It also asked about steps to be taken to abolish the death penalty. Finland made recommendations. 79. France welcomed the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and the adoption of a National Action Plan on Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility. France made recommendations. 80. Gabon commended Burkina Faso for the ratification of a number of international instruments, the adoption of national laws and the establishment of institutions to defend human rights. Gabon encouraged Burkina Faso to continue in its efforts to combat excision. Gabon made a recommendation. 81. Germany expressed appreciation for the progress achieved by Burkina Faso in combating corruption and encouraged the redoubling of efforts, particularly in the legal system. Germany requested to know about measures envisaged to combat impunity in the areas of corruption. Despite progress in combating FGM, the practice remained rife. Germany made recommendations. 82. Ghana noted the creation of the Ministry of Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility and the National Council for the Advancement of Women, progress in educating the public about human rights and the challenges to further progress. International assistance was required to meet challenges, particularly with regard to human trafficking. 83. Guatemala welcomed creation of the Ministry of Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility, the National Human Rights Commission and the National Council of Civil Society Organizations. It expressed concern regarding discrimination against women, FGM, forced and early marriage and women’s land rights. Guatemala made a recommendation. 84. Hungary took positive note of the various policies to improve the rights of women, but remained concerned about insufficient legislation on a minimum age for marriage, polygamy and gender-based violence. Child labour remained widespread. Hungary made recommendations. 85. Indonesia commended Burkina Faso for the efforts taken in the promotion and protection of human rights, particularly through development in the normative and institutional framework. It also commended efforts to promote women’s rights. Indonesia made recommendations. 86. Ireland noted Burkina Faso’s continued consultations on the abolition of the death penalty and the de facto moratorium. It commended Burkina Faso for its legislative child rights reform and noted the establishment of its National Council for the Advancement of Women. It made recommendations. 87. Italy praised Burkina Faso’s efforts in combating child trafficking and asked what further measures it intended to adopt to tackle this crime. It requested more information on the remaining obstacles to abolish the death penalty. It made recommendations. 88. Kazakhstan noted positively Burkina Faso’s ratification of several international human rights treaties, its establishment of a Ministry of Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility and other related National Councils and its de facto moratorium on the death penalty. It made recommendations. 89. Kenya noted the progress made by Burkina Faso in extending the scope of human rights enjoyment and basic freedoms. The adoption of the wide spectrum of national policies and legislation was commendable, but there remain multiple challenges in the full realization of all human rights. It made a recommendation. 90. Latvia appreciated Burkina Faso recently receiving the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism, and its invitations to other Special Procedures mandate holders to visit the country. It made a recommendation. 91. Lesotho stated that the establishment of the Ministry of Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility and the assistance to persons with disabilities were among the many remarkable achievements secured by Burkina Faso, but that it faced some challenges in ensuring equal rights for its citizens. Lesotho encouraged Burkina Faso to continue to improve its policies and programmes and to accede to outstanding human rights instruments. 92. Liechtenstein noted stakeholders’ reports that Burkina Faso’s new draft code on child protection does not prohibit corporal punishment at home. It noted concerns over the wide practice of corporal punishment in alternative care settings and in employment, and over difficulties faced by women in their access to justice. It made recommendations. 93. Luxembourg noted that Burkina Faso has taken major measures to combat gender-based discrimination and violence against women, including FGM and early marriage. It asked about whether there was any assessment mechanism for the Government’s action. It was concerned by child trafficking and hazardous work in mines. It made recommendations. 94. Madagascar commended Burkina Faso’s establishment of its Ministry of Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility and National Committee to Combat Female Circumcision. It noted the efforts of the authorities of Burkina Faso to strengthen policies in education, health, schooling of girls and child trafficking. It encouraged the Government to consolidate human rights achievements, whilst noting the sociocultural, economic and financial constraints on implementing human rights commitments. 95. Malaysia noted Burkina Faso’s progress in combatting violence against women and in trafficking in girls and women for sexual exploitation. However, it recognized that challenges and difficulties remain, including illiteracy and human rights awareness amongst the population. It made recommendations. 96. Mali welcomed Burkina Faso’s achievements in adopting a law on the status of the National Human Rights Commission, establishing national councils, legislating on human rights and civic policy promotion, adopting strategic education and public awareness plans, increasing school attendance by girls and implementing major initiatives to combat poverty and inequality. 97. Mauritania welcomed the establishment of a National Human Rights Commission, the national framework for consultations between public and private sectors in favour of human rights. It noted the adoption of a national plan to consolidate judicial reform actions and its laws on rural land ownership and on agrarian and land reform. 98. Mexico noted that Burkina Faso hosted the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism. It appreciated its efforts to establish new courts and prisons, but called upon it to strengthen action against corruption to encourage equitable distribution of wealth. It made recommendations. 99. Montenegro asked the Burkina Faso delegation to detail the main challenges identified during implementation of its national action plan on zero tolerance of FGM and National Gender Policy and the Government’s projected activities after 2013. It made recommendations. 100. Morocco welcomed the trend of institutional and legal reform prevailing in the promotion of human rights. It welcomed its implementation of the Accelerated Growth and Sustainable Development Strategy. It requested further information on how this policy will contribute to achieving Millennium Development Goals and on its efforts to incorporate human rights education at various levels. 101. Myanmar commended Burkina Faso for ratifying several core international human rights conventions and for adopting relevant domestic measures, including the establishment of the Ministry of Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility and the National Human Rights Commission. It made recommendations. 102. The Netherlands complimented Burkina Faso on improving women’s and children’s rights and for establishing a National Committee to Combat Female Circumcision and engaging in regional talks to stop cross-border female circumcision. Nevertheless, FGM remained widespread. It made recommendations. 103. New Zealand welcomed the establishment of National Human Rights Commission and its broad mandate. It noted the efforts to eliminate violence against women, especially FGM, and its leadership in international processes to tackle such issues. It made recommendations. 104. With regard to human rights education concerns, the delegation stressed that the inclusion of human rights in the formal and non-formal education system had been initiated since 2009 through the development of an educational guide, followed by the inclusion of human rights in official curricula and the training of 300 education supervisors. Discussions were under way on a trial prior to general implementation. 105. The national strategy to accelerate the education of girls, which covered the educational continuum in terms of girls’ education and community homes, provided the essential conditions for girls to have access to and remain in school, and for their educational and social and professional success. 106. Furthermore, through the implementation of the national literacy acceleration programme and special literacy campaigns, with special emphasis on women, the literacy rate should increase from 28 per cent to 60 per cent by 2015. 107. Concerning torture, the delegation stated that Burkina Faso did not recognize the existence of torture or arbitrary arrests in its territory. The security forces received training in human rights, particularly on the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. In addition, detention centres were open to visits from civil society. Measures were taken to ensure that all victims of violence could file a complaint in order to ensure that justice was done. 108. Lastly, regarding the strengthening of the judiciary, the delegation said that, in 2012, the Government of Burkina Faso had undertaken a review of legislation on the status of the judiciary and on the organization, composition and operation of the Higher Council of the Judiciary. 109. With regard to legislation on the status of the judiciary, the aim was to grant judges in general, and presiding judges in particular, a status that protected them from any pressure. 110. As to legislation on the organization, composition and operation of the Higher Council of the Judiciary, the proposed reform involved reducing the number of members appointed by the executive and increasing the number of members elected by their peers. In addition, the Higher Council of the Judiciary would be granted administrative and financial autonomy and exclusive responsibility for managing judges’ careers. 111. Nicaragua expressed awareness of Burkina Faso’s good practices in human rights, including establishment of a dedicated ministry and a national commission, independent of State control. It noted the Government’s determination to continue strengthening its action in promoting gender equality. It made a recommendation. 112. Niger commended Burkina Faso for its public policies guaranteeing its population’s right to development, despite a difficult economic position. Burkina Faso has ratified almost all regional and international human rights instruments. It made recommendations. 113. Nigeria commended Burkina Faso for its diligence in preparing the report and in promoting and protecting human rights in its country. It made recommendations. 114. The Philippines noted Burkina Faso’s ratification of regional and international human rights conventions, anti-corruption measures and improved delivery of social services. It welcomed establishment of the National Council for the Advancement of Women and gender equality enhancement programmes. It made recommendations. 115. The Republic of Moldova commended Burkina Faso for its reform on children’s rights and its measures to eliminate trafficking of persons and discrimination of women. It made recommendations. 116. Rwanda noted that Burkina Faso has adopted policies to protect and promote human rights, including national gender, health and justice policies, amongst others. It commended Burkina Faso for combatting corruption and taking measures to eradicate FGM. It made recommendations. 117. Saudi Arabia specifically noted the establishment of a Ministry of Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility, exemplifying its attachment to promote and raise awareness of human rights. It is also noted the efforts to improve health and welfare by 2020. It made recommendations. 118. Senegal noted that the general human rights framework was being further strengthened through legislation and institution-building, including the Ministry of Human Rights and the Promotion of Civic Responsibility and the National Human Rights Commission, complemented by public policies dedicated to improved living conditions. It made recommendations. 119. Sierra Leone noted that emphasis should be concentrated on four main fronts: intensifying public awareness programmes on human rights; enforcing laws that addressed harmful traditional practices; translating laws and policies into strategies and action plans; and the exchange of experiences within the West African region. 120. Singapore noted the efforts to promote gender equality and empowerment of women and the adoption of legislation to protect women’s right to land ownership and electoral participation. Burkina Faso has implemented measures to combat trafficking in persons, especially children. It made recommendations. 121. Slovakia recognized Burkina Faso’s ratification of international human rights instruments, including the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, and the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and commended its legal and institutional measures on combatting trafficking of persons, gender equality and its zero tolerance for FGM. It made recommendations. 122. Slovenia commended Burkina Faso for its activities towards eliminating FGM and welcomed its efforts to prevent child trafficking and labour. It noted the positive achievements in terms of access to safe drinking water and sanitation. It made recommendations. 123. South Africa noted Burkina Faso’s strengthening of legal frameworks through the ratification of international human rights instruments and its adoption of relevant national legislation, in particular the legislation to bring the National Human Rights Commission in line with the Paris Principles. It made recommendations. 124. Spain welcomed Burkina Faso’s moratorium and intended abolition of the death penalty de jure. It commended the organization of human rights training seminars for members of the security forces, its efforts on women’s rights and gender equality, and its establishment of national councils for women’s advancement and for combatting FGM. It made recommendations. 125. Sri Lanka noted Burkina Faso’s normative developments, including the ratification of the UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education, the adoption of various national laws pertaining to human rights and its policies aimed at widespread political, economic and social development. It made recommendations. 126. The State of Palestine appreciated Burkina Faso’s efforts to promote its human rights situation, despite difficulties and constraints. Educational programmes had been adopted. It applauded legislation on children’s and women’s rights, in particular the national action plan on zero tolerance of FGM. It made recommendations. 127. Sudan welcomed the adoption of legislation to combat trafficking in persons and the prioritization of efforts in human rights and announcing commitments for the upcoming period. It made recommendations. 128. Switzerland noted that Burkina Faso has de facto abolished the death penalty. It regretted the lack of legal consequences for violations of children’s rights. Switzerland expressed concern about the working conditions in the gold mines, as well as their social and ecological consequences. It made recommendations. 129. Thailand noted that Burkina Faso has made crucial progress in improving the conditions of prisons and promoting the rights of detainees, but that women prisoners may have particular needs. It expressed concern about child abuse, including trafficking. Thailand called on OHCHR, States and the international community to respond to the request by Burkina Faso for capacity-building. It made recommendations. 130. Togo took note of the commitment by Burkina Faso to implement the recommendations from the first cycle. It welcomed the adoption of policies and strategies including the strategy for accelerated growth and sustainable development, the implementation of a national health insurance scheme, the employment policy and basic education development. It made recommendations. 131. Tunisia noted the ratification of several international human rights instruments and welcomed the strengthening of the institutional framework. Tunisia commended Burkina Faso for its efforts in eliminating discrimination against women and encouraged it to adopt specific legislation to eliminate especially domestic violence against women and corporal punishment of children. It noted Burkina Faso’s expectations in terms of technical assistance. Tunisia made recommendations. 132. Turkey encouraged Burkina Faso to continue its efforts in public awareness of human rights through an education programme and to facilitate girls’ access to education and continued school attendance. It noted concerns expressed by the Committee on the Rights of the Child regarding birth registration and child detention conditions. It made recommendations. 133. Uganda noted Burkina Faso’s achievements in establishing its National Health Development Plan 2011–2020, adopting a National Gender Policy, based on fundamental human rights and enshrined in its Constitution, and drafting a National Justice Policy 2010– 2019. It made a recommendation. 134. The United Arab Emirates appreciated the importance given to human rights by Burkina Faso, evidenced by creation of a dedicated ministry in 2012 as well as the progress made by its Government in implementing UPR first cycle recommendations. It made a recommendation. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations** 135. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue/listed below have been examined by Burkina Faso and enjoy the support of Burkina Faso: 135.1 Accede to the 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and the 1961 Convention on the reduction of statelessness (Slovakia); 135.2 Ratify the Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, if possible with a view to contributing to the activation of the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court, over the crime of aggression at the beginning of 2017 (Liechtenstein); 135.3 Take measures to adopt specific legislation to prohibit violence and discrimination against women in conformity with the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Brazil); 135.4 Introduce appropriate legislative measures criminalizing all forms of violence against women (Burundi); ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 135.5 Adopt specific legislation to combat violence against women, including social exclusion of women accused of witchcraft (Djibouti); 135.6 Consider adopting a specific legislation to eliminate violence against women, including domestic violence (Chile); 135.7 Promulgate and implement specific laws to punish violence against women (Costa Rica); 135.8 Consider formulating legislation on eliminating violence against women, including domestic violence (Indonesia); 135.9 Adopt specific legislation to eliminate violence against women, including domestic violence (Ireland); 135.10 Consider adopting a law to eliminate violence against women including domestic violence and make more efforts in order to ensure universal access to compulsory education (State of Palestine); 135.11 Bring the penal code in conformity with article 5 of the African Charter for the Rights and Welfare of the Child to which Burkina Faso is a party, which prohibits application of the death penalty to minors (Belgium); 135.12 Promote further internal consultations to ensure the adoption of a code of protection of children in conformity with the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Brazil); 135.13 Accelerate the development and adoption of the Children’s Code (Republic of Moldova); 135.14 Speed up the approval of the Child Code and ensure that this instrument covers all the provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Chile); 135.15 Adopt a comprehensive Child Code, ensuring that it covers all of the provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Ireland); 135.16 Adopt a Child Code full in conformity with the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Togo); 135.17 Adopt a national legislation on child protection and further strengthen its regional partnerships to complement national efforts to safeguard the rights of the child (the Philippines); 135.18 Speed up efforts to establish a national system for free universal birth registration throughout the country, including remote areas and strengthen awareness on the importance of birth registration (Uruguay); 135.19 Strengthen the rights of the child, particularly by ensuring the registration of all children on the Civil Register (Austria); 135.20 Continue its commitment to establishing a free birth registration system at national level in order to allow children to demand their rights during their life and to access to public services (Turkey); 135.21 Further endeavours with regard to the smooth and productive activity of the National Human Rights Commission within the country (Azerbaijan); 135.22 Continue measures aimed at the promotion of civic responsibility to improve responsible citizenship through a culture of values and respect for human rights (Azerbaijan); 135.23 Draw up a national plan for children to ensure systematic efficient implementation of the new legislation introduced in this area (Cape Verde); 135.24 Review, with a human rights approach, the legal framework for the promotion of investment so that provisions favour industries which respect human rights and the environment (Costa Rica); 135.25 Continue its efforts to educate the population on human rights, including by introducing these concepts in the curricula at all school levels (Democratic Republic of Congo); 135.26 Continue promoting and encouraging locally-based and member-driven civil societies in the country (Ethiopia); 135.27 Strengthen efforts to ensure the functionality of monitoring and reporting mechanism of violations of the rights of the child in the entire country, especially in rural areas (Italy); 135.28 Strengthen the operational and financial capacity of the National Human Rights Commission and ensure that it abides by the Paris Principles (France); 135.29 Continue efforts to establish a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Indonesia); 135.30 Ensure the independent, impartial, and effective functioning of the National Human Rights Commission in line with the Paris Principles (New Zealand); 135.31 Further strengthen the structure and mandate of the national institution of promotion and protection of human rights (Niger); 135.32 Provide the National Human Rights Commission with the requisite support to ensure its effectiveness (South Africa); 135.33 Establish a National Human Rights Institution in compliance with the Paris Principles (Sudan); 135.34 Intensify the process to conform the National Human Rights Commission with the Paris Principles (Tunisia); 135.35 Strengthen the Ministry for the Advancement of Women to meet the specific needs of women and girls (Republic of Moldova); 135.36 Continue to implement the programme of human rights education and capacity-building among the relevant stakeholders (Myanmar); 135.37 Continue efforts to raise public awareness about human rights including awareness by law enforcement agencies (Nigeria); 135.38 Double efforts in order to raise awareness on human rights for all categories of the society (Sudan); 135.39 Take more steps in sensitizing the local population on human rights instruments (Uganda); 135.40 Continue its policies aimed at raising awareness on human rights, including through training programmes for law enforcement agencies in view of the important role that they play in implementing human rights and establishing the rule of law in the country (United Arab Emirates); 135.41 Collaborate further with human rights mandate holders (Côte d’Ivoire); 135.42 Implement those recommendations accepted under the UPR exercise (Nicaragua); 135.43 Step up the rate of cooperation with treaty bodies (Niger); 135.44 Continue its efforts to eliminate discrimination against women and promote gender equality (Singapore); 135.45 Do everything possible to ensure gender equality in the country (Guatemala); 135.46 Move further forward on existing measures against discrimination against women, particularly in terms of their inheritance rights, as well as harmful traditional practices against women, in particular in rural areas (Cape Verde); 135.47 Implement a public awareness campaign to promote the effective implementation of the law granting women the access to rural landownership (Law No. 034/2009/AN) (Canada); 135.48 Promote gender equality in all socioeconomic spheres (Viet Nam); 135.49 Continue efforts to improve the participation of women in decision-making (Algeria); 135.50 Continue efforts to promote gender issues in favour of equality between men and women in all areas of socioeconomic life and access to resources (Algeria); 135.51 Adopt the necessary measures to achieve equality between men and women in all the areas of the socioeconomic life, and access to the necessary resources to that end (Argentina); 135.52 Take additional concrete measures to promote and protect the women’s rights, namely measures to prevent, to inform and to fight against discrimination and violence against them (Luxembourg); 135.53 Continue promoting changes in favour of gender equality in all the areas of the socioeconomic life and access to resources (Cuba); 135.54 Consider intensifying its efforts in the actual implementation of programmes aimed at the realization of women rights and improving gender equality (the Philippines); 135.55 Continue to work towards the creation of an enabling environment for women and children and girls and addressing the problem of social exclusion that could hinder the full realization of women’s rights (Philippines); 135.56 Eliminate negative existing practices against women such as forced marriages; guarantee women access to education, as well as to political, social and economic activities (Armenia); 135.57 Ensure that rural women participate in decision-making processes and have full access to education, health services, credit and marketing facilities, land and income-generating projects (Egypt); 135.58 Continue providing the full exercise of women’s rights within the framework of the National Gender Policy (Kazakhstan); 135.59 Take steps to promote equal working conditions for women and the right to private property (Mexico); 135.60 Continue policies aimed at reducing inequalities in access to the full enjoyment of human rights by all the social groups with special attention paid to women, children and persons with disabilities (Kazakhstan); 135.61 Continue its efforts in promoting gender equality including implementing its National Gender Policy which is aimed at changing behaviour and encouraging equality between men and women in all areas of socioeconomic life and access to resources (Malaysia); 135.62 Take the necessary measures to fight against discrimination faced by persons with disabilities (Argentina); 135.63 Strengthen the rights of vulnerable categories of the population, including the rights of the elderly (Senegal); 135.64 Continue to take measures to ensure the social protection of the most vulnerable groups of the population, including persons with disabilities and the elderly (Belarus); 135.65 Continue strengthening services for children with disabilities and adopt policies for their inclusion in regular education (Egypt); 135.66 Continue taking appropriate measures to protect the most vulnerable children, particularly girls, children with disabilities and children living in rural areas and to ensure effective protection of children especially against sexual abuse, trafficking and child labour (Cyprus); 135.67 Investigate allegations of torture and ill-treatment by law and order forces and ensure rapid administration of justice (Austria); 135.68 Take all necessary steps to establish an effective national preventive mechanism to improve prisoners’ conditions, both their physical conditions and their legal rights including due process (Denmark); 135.69 Guarantee the rights of prisoners; provide access to legal aid from the moment of arrest and create programmes of rehabilitation, including for juvenile offenders (Mexico); 135.70 Consider implementing the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders or the “Bangkok Rules” to provide them with appropriate treatment (Thailand); 135.71 Explore way for setting up separated facilities for children deprived of liberty (Turkey); 135.72 Ensure that decent sanitary conditions are guaranteed for detainees (France); 135.73 Continue and increase efforts to eradicate female genital mutilation (FGM) throughout the country; bring perpetrators to justice and ensure adequate punishment; and adopt measures to prohibit traditional matrimonial practices, including forced marriages which are particularly harmful to children (Uruguay); 135.74 Take concrete steps, especially in regions displaying a high prevalence, to eliminate harmful customary practices, such as FGM, prohibited by law (Denmark); 135.75 Pursue a regular dialogue with the stakeholders in various communities nationwide, including the village chiefs, religious leaders, men and boys as well as civil society in order to promote a better understanding of the importance of equality between women and men and to identify practical means of putting an end to harmful practices against women and girls including FGM, early and forced marriages and levirate (Canada); 135.76 Continue its efforts to promote the rights of the child and pursue its fight to eradicate the FGM which still persists in the country (Burundi); 135.77 Double its effort in fighting harmful traditional practices (Ethiopia); 135.78 Take measures in view to effectively combat violence against women (Togo); 135.79 In order to eradicate FGM, increase public advocacy and training of judiciary and public officials, traditional leaders and parents, both men and women (Finland); 135.80 Continue to work to eliminate FGM, particularly in rural areas (France); 135.81 Redouble efforts to heighten awareness of the population against FGM and excision (Germany); 135.82 Continue its efforts to eradicate the practice of FGM by, for example, looking at the lessons learned by other countries in the region that are dealing with this issue (the Netherlands); 135.83 Continue its commendable efforts for the total eradication of FGM (Rwanda); 135.84 Further strengthening national efforts to eliminate all forms of violence against women, including FGM, and taking all the necessary measures to enable women to participate in public and private life on an equal footing with men (Slovenia); 135.85 Continue adopting and implementing all the necessary measures and provisions for raising legal and awareness levels, in order that FGM be effectively eliminated in the whole country (Spain); 135.86 Take measures to protect women accused of witchcraft (Austria); 135.87 Consider setting up a global action plan to combat violence against women and children, with particular attention to forced marriages, and the growing phenomenon of street children (Belgium);135.88 Set the minimum age for marriage for boys and girls at 18 years (Hungary); 135.89 Adopt specific legislation to prohibit violence against women, including domestic violence (Hungary); 135.90 Take further strong measures to prevent trafficking and exploitation of women and children (Australia); 2 	The recommendation made during the interactive dialogue was as follows: “Consider setting-up a global action plan to combat violence against women and children, with particular attention to forced marriages, polygamy, and the growing phenomenon of street children (Belgium).” 135.91 Renew its efforts to combat all forms of trafficking of children, and formulate a policy of child protection to ensure a better system for safeguarding children’s rights (Luxembourg); 135.92 Further step up its efforts to prevent and eradicate trafficking in persons and consider the possibility of developing a national action plan and of inviting the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially in women and children (Belarus); 135.93 Intensify efforts in the fight against trafficking in persons, in particular women and children (Republic of Moldova); 135.94 Ensure effective implementation of its national action plan against human trafficking by law enforcement officials with the aim to dismantle illicit networks, whilst reintegrating children victims back in school and preventing revictimization (Thailand); 135.95 Strengthen the protection of children, in particular by fighting against early marriage (Switzerland); 135.96 Set the minimum legal age for marriage at 18 years and explicitly prohibit forced early marriage (Germany); 135.97 Intensify efforts to combat child trafficking and international child abduction in order to conserve the gains already achieved by the Government in this area (Nigeria); 135.98 Continue its efforts, in cooperation with UNICEF and relevant United Nations agencies, to combat trafficking in persons and child abduction (Singapore); 135.99 Lobby for and enact adequate legal penalties for violations of the laws prohibiting the worst forms of child labour and forced labour and provide sufficient resources and training to enforce the law (United States of America); 135.100 Intensify efforts to combat all forms of child labour by strengthening the labour inspectorate to ensure effective implementation of child labour laws, both in formal and informal sectors (Hungary); 135.101 Continue its efforts to stop child labour, particularly in the mining sector (the Netherlands); 135.102 Exert utmost efforts to eliminate and prevent child labour, in particular in the mining sector, agriculture and as domestic servants (Slovakia); 135.103 Continue deploying efforts to attach priority to the vulnerable situation of child workers and children working in gold mining; and increase inspection of labour to ensure the effective application of laws related child labour in the formal and informal sectors, and ratify the ILO Convention No. 189 on Domestic Workers (Uruguay); 135.104 Continue its efforts to remove children from labour in small-scale gold mines (Slovenia); 135.105 Prohibit child labour in contravention of ILO Convention No. 138 on Minimum Age and promote an information policy for those concerned families (Austria); 135.106 Ensure implementation of the laws against corporal punishment by encouraging the reporting of cases and by providing the means for effective investigation and prosecution of perpetrators (Liechtenstein); 135.107 Take the necessary legislative, administrative and financial measures to ensure the independence of the judiciary , including ending administrative and financial control by the executive and ensuring that the Higher Council of the Judiciary is not under the authority of the executive (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 135.108 Undertake an in-depth assessment of the justice sector, prioritizing the juvenile justice system, to identify and address deficiencies under Burkinabe and international law (United States of America); 135.109 Maintain its positive efforts to improve the juvenile justice system in conformity with the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice (Egypt); 135.110 Further strengthening the criminal justice system and prison management in the country (Ethiopia); 135.111 Adopt legislative, administrative and financial arrangements to ensure the independence of the Judiciary and abolish any power of appointment, rating and control by the Executive on judges and on the High Council of the Judiciary (Germany); 135.112 Facilitate women’s access to justice by providing them with information on their rights, on the available legal remedies against discrimination and on the way to use these remedies (Liechtenstein); 135.113 Hire and train additional labour inspectors and equip them with necessary resources to adequately enforce relevant labour and trafficking laws (United States of America); 135.114 Continue efforts to support employment generation among the youth (Sri Lanka); 135.115 Strengthen the administration of mines and regional labour inspection offices, to effectively implement the related laws, in order to guarantee the relevant human rights (Switzerland); 135.116 Continue to strengthen economic, social and cultural rights with a view to improving living conditions for the population (the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela); 135.117 Make efforts to eliminate regional disparities in access to safe drinking water, especially between urban and rural areas (Slovenia); 135.118 Continue to prioritize policies and programmes aimed at eradicating poverty and underdevelopment and ensuring the enjoyment of economic social and cultural rights (South Africa); 135.119 Evaluate the possibility to set out, as a national priority, the full realization of the right to water and sanitation, which is essential to achieve other priorities established such as health, education and gender equality (Spain); 135.120 Continue to prioritize the allocation of financial and human resources to the health sector, focusing on preventive measures and treatment (Egypt); 135.121 Extend and expand comprehensive programmes to deliver sexual and reproductive health services to women and girls, particularly those who are more vulnerable, such as rural women (New Zealand); 135.122 Continue efforts to improve health services for all (Saudi Arabia); 135.123 Adopt adequate and effective measures to protect infant and maternal health, as well as access to family planning and contraceptive methods (Spain); 135.124 Continue efforts in the frame of the realization of the rights to health and education (Senegal); 135.125 Continue implementing educational policies in the area of health and education (Cuba); 135.126 Ensure the promotion of economic, social and cultural rights, including better access to education for female children and persons with disabilities, as well as combating illiteracy (Gabon); 135.127 Take the necessary measures to ensure to improve education for children (Armenia); 135.128 Continue implementing plans to enable girls and persons with disabilities to have access to education (Saudi Arabia); 135.129 Continue with the efforts underway to guarantee school enrolment for girls (Cuba); 135.130 Continue efforts to promote education for all and especially ensure access to education for girls (Sri Lanka); 135.131 Improve its fight against illiteracy in order to reverse the current trend (the Democratic Republic of the Congo); 135.132 Further incorporate human rights education in school curricula (Ethiopia); 135.133 Continue its positive approach in the field of education including ensuring free primary and post-primary education as well as incorporating human rights education in the school curricula (Malaysia). 136. The following recommendations enjoy the support of Burkina Faso which considers that they are already implemented or in the process of implementation: 136.1 Further fulfil the internationally taken obligations as well as implement the recently ratified international treaties (Kazakhstan); 136.2 Adopt legislation to include payment for environmental services in order to promote sustainable economic and industrial development (Mexico); 136.3 Undertake necessary judicial reforms with a view to ensure the independence of the Judiciary and improve access to justice, in particular for the most vulnerable groups (Slovakia); 136.4 Introduce a comprehensive job creation programme particularly targeting young people (Viet Nam); 136.5 Consider adopting a strategy for post-primary and -secondary level education for girls (State of Palestine). 137. The following recommendations will be examined by Burkina Faso which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-fourth session of the Human Rights Council in September 2013: 137.1 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty with the ultimate aim of abolishing the death penalty in all circumstances (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 137.2 Accelerate the process of consultation with the view to ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Uruguay); 137.3 Continue the process for the ratification of the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty, there being a draft law which was formulated in 2011 (Belgium); 137.4 Accede to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Djibouti); 137.5 Accede to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Germany); 137.6 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Finland, Spain); 137.7 Ratify the Second Protocol of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty, in order to de jure abolish the death penalty (Switzerland); 137.8 Specifically abolish the death penalty and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (France); 137.9 Complete the procedure of accession to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty, to formalize the de facto moratorium on the death penalty (Montenegro); 137.10 Step up consultations to better prepare national opinion for the ratification of the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Rwanda); 137.11 Complete the national process aimed at abolishing the death penalty and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Turkey); 137.12 Consider the ratification of the new Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Slovakia); 137.13 Take further steps toward the abolition of the death penalty in law (New Zealand); 137.14 Formalize this approach (of not carrying out the death penalty) by ceasing the imposition of death sentences and ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Australia); 137.15 Take further steps leading to a formal abolition of the death penalty, commuting the existing sentences to life imprisonment terms (Slovakia); 137.16 Continue consultations in order to achieve abolition of the death penalty (Togo); 137.17 Abolish the death penalty since in the facts, no execution has taken place over the last twenty years (Burundi); 137.18 Commute all death sentences to terms of imprisonment (Italy). 138. The recommendations below did not enjoy the support of country Burkina Faso: 138.1 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (France); 138.2 Extend a standing invitation to all mandate holders (Hungary); 138.3 Step up its cooperation with special procedures mandate holders of the Human Rights Council and eventually consider extending a standing invitation to all Special Procedures mandate holders of the Human Rights Council (Latvia); 138.4 Extend a standing invitation to all thematic Special Procedures (Montenegro); 138.5 Extend a standing invitation to Special Procedures mandate holders (Tunisia); 138.6 Explicitly prohibit corporal punishment in all settings, including the home and all care settings (Liechtenstein); 138.7 Extend a standing invitation to Special Procedures (Guatemala); 138.8 Pay particular attention to polygamy in a future global action plan to combat violence against women and children (Belgium); 138.9 Eliminate provisions on polygamy (Hungary). 139. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. 3 	The recommendation made during the interactive dialogue was as follows: “Consider setting-up a global action plan to combat violence against women and children, with particular attention to forced marriages, polygamy, and the growing phenomenon of street children (Belgium).” III. Voluntary pledges and commitments 
140. Burkina Faso undertook to submit an interim report on progress made in the implementation of the recommendations of the universal periodic review to the Human Rights Council in 2015. Annex 
[English/French only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of Burkina Faso was headed by Her Excellency Ms. Julie Prudence Somda-Nigna, Minister for Human Rights and Civil Promotion, and composed of the following members: • S.E.M. VOKOUMA Prosper, Ambassadeur, Représentant permanent du Burkina 
Faso à Genève; 
• M. SOUGOURI Dieudonné Désiré, Premier Conseilleur près l’Ambassade, Mission 
permanente du Burkina Faso à Genève; 
• Mme MERINDOL/OUOBA Clarisse, Conseiller	 juridique près l’Ambassade, 
Mission permanente du Burkina Faso à Genève; 
• M. BAMBARA Paulin, Ministère des droits humains et de la promotion civique; • M. GOUBA Nosse Firmin, Ministère des droits humains et de la promotion civique; • M. GOUBA P. Pascal, Ministère des droits humains et de la promotion civique; • M. NANA Adama, Ministère des droits humains et de la promotion civique; • M. DIALLO Issa, Ministère des droits humains et de la promotion civique; • M. BAMBARA Jean de Dieu, Ministère des droits humains et de la promotion 
civique; 
• M. TIEMOUNOU Oumarou,	 Ministère des droits humains et de la promotion 
civique; 
• Mme NIKYEMA/TAPSOBA Stéphanie, Ministère des droits humains	 et de la 
promotion civique; 
• M. ILBOUDO/YAMEOGO Marie Justine, Ministère de l’enseignement secondaire 
et supérieur; 
• M. KABORE Jean Paul; Commission nationale des droits de l’homme; • M. OUEDRAOGO/KABORE Honorine Félicité, Ministère de l’action sociale et de 
la solidarité nationale; 
• M. SANDWIDI Elie, Ministère de la jeunesse, de la formation professionnelle et de 
l’emploi; 
• M. LOYA Tuansi Bruno, Ministère de la santé; • Mme 	KINDA/REMEN Emma, Ministère de l’éducation nationale et de 
l’alphabétisation; 
• M. NAMOANO Rodrigues, Projet de renforcement de la gouvernance politique 
(PRGP); 
• M. ZIGANI Guehon, Ministère de la fonction publique, du travail et de la sécurité 
Sociale; 
• Mme TOURE Mariam Vanessa, Radio-Télévision du Burkina; • Mme TRAORE Nadine, Ministère des Affaires Étrangères et de la Coopération Régionale; • Mme DAHO Agnès, Ministère de l’Économie et des Finances; • M. DABIRE Urbain, troisième Secrétaire près l’Ambassade, Mission Permanente du Burkina Faso à Genève. 