Distr.: General 5 July 2013 English Original: English/French General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-fourth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Cameroon * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Contents 
Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–130 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–31 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 32–130 6 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 131–132 15  Annex Composition of the delegation ....................................................................................................... 26 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its sixteenth session from 22 April to 3 May 2013. The review of Cameroon was held at the 15th meeting on 1 May 2013. The delegation of Cameroon was headed by Pierre Moukoko Mbonjo, Minister of External Relations. At its 18th meeting held on 3 May 2013, the Working Group adopted the report on Cameroon. 2. On 14 January 2013, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Cameroon: Italy, Kazakhstan and Kenya. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Cameroon: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/CMR/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/CMR/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/16/CMR/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by the Czech Republic, Mexico, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Slovenia, Spain and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Cameroon through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR). I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation explained that the national report, which had been drafted by an interministerial committee under the auspices of the Prime Minister, had been subjected to a series of reviews, beginning with all the ministerial departments involved in human rights, followed by civil society organizations and, lastly, at a joint Government/civil society workshop. 6. The delegation emphasized that progress had been made in the field of human rights since February 2009, in terms of strengthening strategic orientations, improving the normative and institutional framework, and implementing practical measures. 7. At the strategic level, Cameroon had adopted the Growth and Employment Strategy Paper in 2010 and had also initiated the process of adoption of the National Action Plan for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights. 8. With regard to the normative and institutional framework, the delegation noted that Cameroon had ratified eight international human rights and humanitarian law conventions. Two of the instruments had been the subject of recommendations accepted during the first cycle of the Universal Periodic Review, in 2009,1 namely, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict and the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. African regional instruments had also been ratified between 2009 and 2012. 9. As to the specific measures taken during the period under review, the delegation declared that key initiatives had been undertaken to improve the overall human rights situation. Access to high-quality, low-cost food remained a constant priority and steps had been taken to reduce the high cost of living and promote the quality of products intended for human consumption. 10. Concerning the right to work and access to employment, the delegation noted that, in February 2011, Cameroon had launched an extensive programme to recruit 25,000 young persons to the public service. It also emphasized that the country’s appeal to foreign investors and the implementation of major State projects offered good prospects for guaranteeing Cameroonians the right to work. 11. With regard to persons with disabilities, the delegation referred to the measures taken to promote their access to education, such as total or partial exemption from school and university fees. It also provided details of several achievements in guaranteeing the rights of persons living with disabilities. 12. With regard to the right to participate in the management of public affairs, the delegation noted that Elections Cameroon, a body established in 2009 to monitor the elections, had conducted its activities satisfactorily. Elections Cameroon had thus organized the country’s recent — and first — senatorial elections, held on 14 April 2013, and the presidential elections of October 2011. The delegation listed various measures that had facilitated successful elections, including the free establishment of national identity cards and the effective operation of all the regional and departmental branches of Elections Cameroon. The adoption of a single Electoral Code and the overhaul of the electoral rolls using biometric data strengthened the transparency of elections and confidence in the electoral process. 13. The delegation emphasized that most of the accepted recommendations had been implemented satisfactorily. 14. With regard to recommendations on women’s rights, the Government had intensified capacity-building actions for the prevention and management of gender-based violence, adopted the national strategy against such forms of violence and implemented a programme to combat various forms of violence against women. 15. The respect of freedom of expression had been manifested through, inter alia, better freedom of the press, the establishment of the National Communication Council and the organization of training for journalists on the respect of professional norms and ethics. It highlighted that the status of journalists or human right defenders was not tantamount to exemption from being prosecuted for common law crimes. 16. Regarding the relations related to education, the delegation mentioned, among others, the opening of eight universities, the teaching of national languages and cultures and the boosting of the teaching of human rights in schools. 17. Concerning the fight against corruption, the delegation stated that Cameroon had stepped up its efforts through, inter alia, the development of the National Strategy against 1 A/HRC/11/21, para. 76. Corruption and the creation of the Special Criminal Court and a Ministry in charge of Public Contracts. 18. In terms of public health, the delegation noted the decline of the HIV/AIDS prevalence, the stabilization of the budget of the Ministry of Health and significant decline in the mortality rate of children under 5 years. 19. With regard to the recommendation to strengthen the National Commission for Human Rights and Freedoms (NCHRF), the delegation said that its implementation had been translated concretely in the increase of its budget and its compliance with the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (Paris Principles). 20. The delegation also underlined the country’s fruitful international cooperation in the area of human rights and its compliance with its obligation of submitting reports. 21. Furthermore, Cameroon received in 2011 and 2012 several regional and international mandate holders, such as the Special Rapporteur on Human Rights Defenders in Africa of the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights and the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the right to food. In addition to the expected visit of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, three other invitations had been sent to United Nations special procedures. 22. The delegation noted with satisfaction the protection of children’s rights and the carrying out of a national ongoing study on the identification of indigenous people. 23. However, the implementation of some recommendations still remained causes for concern for Cameroon. 24. In that regard, the delegation mentioned the compliance of places of detention with international standards. Even though some progress had been made, efforts still needed to be carried out to improve food for prisoners, enhance sanitation in prisons, build new prisons and modernize existing ones. The continuation of the implementation of the Programme for Improving the Conditions of Detention (PACDET) with the collaboration of the European Union was expected to overcome some of those challenges. 25. The delegation was also concerned at the adherence to international conventions and noted that of the seven international instruments whose ratification had been accepted, two had been actually ratified (the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (OP-CAT) and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict (OP-CRC-AC)). 26. Regarding decent housing facilities, the delegation stated that the 2010–2013 programme for the building of 10,000 low-cost houses and the development of 50,000 building plots was under way although it had met with some delays. 27. The unsatisfactory implementation of some recommendations was not the result of bad faith from the Government but was due to limited resources, time necessary for the changes of attitude from the population and administrative work-related issues. 28. The delegation listed various challenges that Cameroon had been facing such as the fight against impunity; problems linked to the capacity-building of State and civil society’s stakeholders; and education and awareness on human rights issues. Added to those challenges were the inadequate means for economic, social and cultural rights; the lack of a formal mechanism for monitoring and evaluating public policy and the lack of the collection and dissemination of statistics on human rights. 29. The delegation reiterated the commitment of Cameroon to continue implementing the recommendations accepted in 2009 and those to be agreed upon at the end of the present review. Cameroon would develop an action plan and a roadmap for the implementation of the recommendations and the consultation of governmental and civil society’s stakeholders and continue its cooperation with the subregional United Nations Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa. 30. Regarding the advance questions raised by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Slovenia on violence and discrimination against women, the delegation replied that the actual revision of the Penal Code would allow eventually repressing all forms of violence against women. Sexual assaults are the most common form of violence against women and perpetrators are systematically prosecuted and sentenced in most cases. The Government had developed a national strategy to fight against sexual violence around several axes such as prevention; legal and psychosocial counselling of victims; research; and the fight against specific violence. 31. With regard to female genital mutilation (FGM), the delegation noticed that the phenomenon was restricted to the far north, north and south-west parts of the country and to a few sites in Yaoundé. In total, it stated that 1.4 per cent of the population was mutilated in Cameroon. It listed several actions carried out to fight against FGM, such as microprojects to allow persons who practise FGM to develop income-generating activities and the organization of an annual campaign called “Zero tolerance to FGM”. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 32. During the interactive dialogue, 82 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue can be found in chapter II of the present report. 33. Slovakia acknowledged the ratification of OP-CRC-AC. It commended the upgraded accreditation of the National Commission for Human Rights and Freedoms in accordance with the Paris Principles. It made recommendations. 34. Slovenia commended the ratification of OP-CRC-AC. It encouraged further strengthening Cameroonian efforts towards the elimination of FGM. It praised Cameroon for its endeavours to eliminate and prevent children trafficking but was concerned about child abuse. Slovenia made recommendations. 35. South Africa commended several treaties’ ratification and measures to protect women’s rights, particularly FGM. It noted steps towards the implementation of Integrated Management of Childhood Illness and encouraged Cameroon to similarly heighten its efforts to reduce maternal mortality and ensure women’s access to reproductive health services. It made a recommendation. 36. Spain noted the legislative reforms, including measures to protect and promote the rights of persons with disabilities, the fight against trafficking in persons and the Government’s reorganization for better compliance with its commitment on human rights. It made recommendations. 37. Sudan welcomed the active engagement in the UPR process. It commended the efforts taken in the implementation of the recommendations including the review of policies and the legislation in Cameroon and commended the adoption of the National Plan of Action. It made a recommendation. 38. Thailand commended measures to strengthen the judiciary independence; combat poverty and trafficking in persons; and protect vulnerable groups. It was concerned about women’s violence. Thailand engaged with Cameroon for training on the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (Bangkok Rules) and the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. It made recommendations. 39. Togo welcomed the creation of the interministerial committee to monitor the implementation of international and regional human rights mechanisms’ recommendations; the National Action Plan on Human Rights; and the ratification of several treaties. It made recommendations. 40. Tunisia noted several legal, political and institutional progresses. It encouraged Cameroon to further eliminate women’s violence and eradicate corporal punishment of children. It called upon the High Commissioner and the international community to meet the expectations of Cameroon regarding technical assistance. It made recommendations. 41. Uganda noted the interministerial committee to monitor the implementation of international and human rights mechanisms’ recommendations; the National Human Rights Education Programme; and the National Plan of Action. It called upon the international community to provide Cameroon with assistance. It made a recommendation. 42. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland urged Cameroon to speak out against threats against human rights defenders and the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) community and provide security; and decriminalize same-sex acts between consenting adults. It expressed concern over violence against women; poor access to information and limitations on the press; and bans imposed on journalists. It made recommendations. 43. The United States of America looked forward to further efforts to strengthen the rule of law and end impunity regarding human rights violations committed by security forces and public officials. It was concerned about prison conditions and overcrowding; freedom of assembly, association and expression; and lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) persons. It made recommendations. 44. Uruguay commended the country’s recent ratifications and the laws to strengthen the independence of the National Commission for Human Rights and Freedoms. It made recommendations. 45. Uzbekistan welcomed reforms to strengthen the human rights protection system of Cameroon, particularly the Employment Strategy; the National Plan of Action for Human Rights; and the reorganization of the National Commission for Human Rights and Freedoms. It noted the ratification of OP-CAT, OP-CRC-AC and several International Labour Organization (ILO) conventions. It made recommendations. 46. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela noted the investments by Cameroon in livestock and fish production to guarantee food availability. It highlighted its strides towards universal and free education and measures to improve the situation of persons with disabilities. It made a recommendation. 47. Viet Nam commended the ratification of several regional and international human rights instruments; the improvement of the standard of living; and the 2012 National Plan of Action for Human Rights. It made a recommendation. 48. Zimbabwe noted the National Plan of Action for Human Rights. It highlighted activities carried out by the National Commission for Human Rights and Freedoms and civil society organizations. It made recommendations. 49. Afghanistan recognized steps to promote and protect human rights, including the rights of persons with disabilities, right to work, to food and access to employment. It commended the ratification of international instruments and the Growth and Employment Strategy. Afghanistan made recommendations. 50. Algeria commended the National Plan of Action for Human Rights; the five-year protection plan against FGM; the National Human Rights Education Programme; measures to improve socioeconomic rights; the interministerial committee; and the law for persons with disabilities. It made recommendations. 51. Angola commended the National Plan of Action for Human Rights. It noted efforts to combat corruption; the ratification of OP-CAT and OP-CRC-AC, among others; and the establishment of several institutions, such as the interministerial committee. Angola made a recommendation. 52. Argentina commended the interministerial committee of prevention and fight against trafficking in persons and the interministerial committee to monitor the implementation of international and regional human rights mechanisms’ recommendations. Argentina made recommendations. 53. Armenia acknowledged the National Plan of Action for Human Rights and the ratification of human rights treaties. It noted the priority given to education and the invitation to the Independent Expert on minority issues. It made recommendations. 54. Australia welcomed the supplementary legislation on the functioning of the National Commission for Human Rights and Freedoms. It was concerned about prosecution of homosexuality. It called on Cameroon to implement the human rights conventions. It made recommendations. 55. Bangladesh noted the positive actions taken to ensure the right to food, work and employment, health, education and rights of persons with disabilities. 56. Belgium welcomed the greater independence of the National Commission for Human Rights and Freedoms as well as the setting up of a national human rights education programme. It made recommendations. 57. Replying to questions concerning homosexuality, the delegation of Cameroon noted that Cameroonian society did not yet accept homosexuality as normal behaviour and that attitudes would change over time. The delegation stressed that homosexuals were not persecuted and that the few incidents that had been brought to the attention of the international community had occurred in public places. The phenomenon, which was quantitatively negligible, should therefore be put into perspective. Furthermore, article 29 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights provided that a State could limit a freedom for the purpose of “meeting the just requirements of morality, public order and the general welfare in a democratic society”. 58. Concerning the death penalty, the delegation noted that only one execution had been carried out since President Paul Biya had come to power. The law was the expression of the general will and the Government was required to take into account its electorate, regardless of its convictions. The death penalty was not applied de facto and it would eventually be abolished but it was important to take into account changes in society. 59. With regard to journalists and human rights defenders, the delegation said that Cameroon had some 60 radio stations and 20 television channels, which allowed free debate, and about a hundred private newspapers. It declared that no journalists were in prison because of their profession and that no journalism graduates experienced problems. The Government did not prosecute journalists — only individuals did so, for defamation or dissemination of false information — and references to the decriminalization of press offences concerned defamation rather than press offences. 60. The delegation also said that the Government did not tolerate threats against human rights defenders and that investigations were carried out in such cases. 61. Regarding the right of association, the delegation noted that provisions were in place for all to express and organize freely. However, it should be emphasized that the Government prohibited demonstrations when there was information suggesting that violence might ensue, but that did not undermine the right of association. 62. Benin noted the Government’s commitment to tackle poverty through the adoption of the growth and employment strategy paper to ensure food security and jobs creation in rural areas. It encouraged Cameroon to pursue its efforts to ensure suitable housing for each citizen and eradicate FGM. 63. Botswana expressed appreciation for the adoption of the growth and employment strategy paper in 2010 and the validation of the National Plan of Action for Human Rights in 2012. It made recommendations. 64. Brazil acknowledged an improved access to education, targeted programmes for several aspects of women’s rights, in particular related to FGM. It made recommendations. 65. Bulgaria welcomed the validation of the National Plan of Action for Human Rights. It noted the Government’s substantial awareness-raising and action-oriented measures to promote and protect women’s rights. It made a recommendation. 66. Burkina Faso encouraged Cameroon to continue adopting measures to improve the administration of justice, to go on with the guarantee of care services, particularly regarding maternal and child health, adopting the five-year action plan against FGM, guarantee the rights of persons with disabilities and request support from the relevant United Nations agencies. 67. Burundi commended Cameroon for its National Commission for Human Rights and Freedoms and the programme to create jobs. It welcomed the ongoing training provided to police staff, gendarmerie, penitentiary administration, army and courts. It made recommendations. 68. Cambodia welcomed the ratification of OP-CAT and the OP-CRC-AC. It noted the creation of the National Plan of Action for Human Rights and the national plan of action to combat trafficking and sexual exploitation of children. Cambodia made recommendations. 69. Canada recalled that, in 2009, it had recommended that Cameroon abolish the privative penalty for press offences and that Cameroon had accepted it. Canada requested what measures had been taken in this regard and when Cameroon was expected to abolish that penalty. It made recommendations. 70. Cape Verde highlighted the National Human Rights Education Programme, a platform including a programme of fight against violence towards women, creation of an interministerial committee of prevention and fight against trafficking in persons and a law on the protection of persons with disabilities. It made recommendations. 71. Chad noted that Cameroon had strengthened its human rights framework by validating the National Plan of Action for Human Rights and elaborating the strategy document for growth and employment. It encouraged Cameroon to pursue its initiated efforts and asked for the support of partners to join Cameroon in the implementation of recommendations. 72. Chile welcomed the ratification of OP-CAT, among others. It congratulated Cameroon for giving priority to full and universal education. Chile appreciated measures to eradicate FGM and strengthen press freedom. It made recommendations. 73. China noted with satisfaction the validation by Cameroon of the National Plan of Action for Human Rights and its combat to fight corruption. It commended the Government’s efforts to ensure food security and provide medical care and special benefits to persons with disabilities. It highlighted the increase in education facilities. It made recommendations. 74. Comoros underlined the country’s efforts to guarantee human rights and in particular children and women’s rights. It made a recommendation. 75. Congo noted the creation of the interministerial committee on monitoring implementation of recommendations of the international and regional human rights mechanisms, the validation of the National Plan of Action for Human Rights. It highlighted the ratification of the OP-CRC-AC and OP-CAT. 76. Costa Rica acknowledged the strengthening of the National Commission for Human Rights and Freedoms and the National Plan of Action for Human Rights. It expressed concern about torture and ill-treatment by prison officials in places of detention. It made recommendations. 77. Côte d’Ivoire commended the country’s accession to OP-CAT and OP-CRC-AC. It expressed appreciation for steps taken in favour of children’s rights and education for all. It encouraged Cameroon to pursue its efforts to effectively implement the first cycle UPR recommendations. It made recommendations. 78. Cuba acknowledged the country’s respect of equality, social harmony, tolerance and non-discrimination and the guarantee of the rights of children, women, minorities, people with disabilities and vulnerable groups. It recognized progress in education and health. Cuba made a recommendation. 79. Cyprus noted that the National Commission for Human Rights and Freedoms visited detention centres. It welcomed its OP-CAT ratification, but was concerned about reports of continued FGM, stressing that high-level political commitment must complement community-based solutions to end that practice. It made a recommendation. 80. The Czech Republic welcomed the Cameroonian ratification of OP-CRC-AC and OP-CAT, and encouraged it to continue in its efforts to promote and protect human rights. It made recommendations. 81. The Democratic Republic of the Congo recognized the progress of Cameroon, including ratification of international instruments, adoption of a National Plan of Action for Human Rights, enhancement of the rights of vulnerable groups and the dedicated National Human Rights Education Programme. It made recommendations. 82. Djibouti noted the progress of Cameroon in strengthening its normative provisions, ratifying OP-CAT and the main international treaties promoting and protecting human rights and reflecting its diligence in cooperating with the human rights system. It made recommendations. 83. Egypt welcomed the establishment of an interministerial committee for monitoring implementation of UPR recommendations and/or decisions from regional and international human rights mechanisms and the committee on the prevention and fight against trafficking in persons. It welcomed the process aimed at integrating human rights into policies and programmes. It made recommendations. 84. Estonia noted the adoption by Cameroon of a National Plan of Action, its National Human Rights Education Programme, its support for the principles and resolutions concerning women, peace and security contained in Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), and its action against gender-based discrimination and FGM, which it urged Cameroon to criminalize. It made recommendations. 85. Ethiopia appreciated the Cameroonian Government’s legislative and policy measures to strengthen its human rights mechanisms. It asked Cameroon to detail the measures taken to fight inequality between men and women, improve living conditions and combat harmful traditional practices. It made recommendations. 86. France welcomed the Government’s ratification of OP-CRC-AC and its joint monitoring, with civil society, of the implementation of UPR first cycle recommendations. It made recommendations. 87. Regarding the ratification of some international instruments to which Cameroon was not yet a party, the delegation pointed out that the signature and ratification of all the international human rights conventions had been a constitutional commitment since 1996. It recalled that the fact that some instruments had not yet been signed and/or ratified was the result of internal and legislative procedures, rather than reluctance on the part of the Government. The delegation noted that Cameroon had signed the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and that its cooperation with the International Criminal Court was exemplary. 88. With regard to its standing invitation to special procedures mandate holders, the delegation recalled that, each year, Cameroon received special rapporteurs of the Human Rights Council and the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights and that they were all welcome. However, the Government was occasionally surprised that invitations sent were not taken up. One year ago, Cameroon had reiterated its invitation to the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to visit the country. 89. The delegation also stressed that it shared the concerns expressed by speakers in relation to women’s rights. It nevertheless began by stating that Cameroon was the country of equal pay for men and women and that there was a majority of women in universities and grandes écoles. Women were also present in all State sectors and, during the last senatorial elections, political parties had included 30 per cent of women in their lists. Despite those achievements, the delegation recognized that female genital mutilation was an unacceptable human tragedy arising from both cultural and economic factors, that awareness-raising was necessary to end such practices and that excisers should be given the opportunity to retrain. 90. The delegation stated that efforts were being made to restrict illegal child labour in cotton plantations. 91. On the issue of detention, the delegation reiterated that the standards applicable in prisons were not always consistent with international standards but that efforts were being made to improve conditions of detention, despite budget constraints. 92. Gabon welcomed Cameroonian cooperation with international mechanisms for the promotion and protection of human rights, in particular its ratification of multiple texts at international and regional levels. It commended Cameroon for its work favouring certain human rights categories, for establishing several dedicated national institutions and for strengthening the rule of law and good governance through policies and action plans designed to guarantee individual rights and public freedoms. 93. Germany recognized the Cameroonian Government’s constant efforts to strengthen human rights and commended it for ratifying OP-CRC-AC. It made recommendations. 94. Ghana welcomed the establishment of an interministerial implementation monitoring body, and its ratification of several international and regional human rights and humanitarian legal instruments. It recognised its measures to eradicate harmful traditional practices and FGM. However, it shared the concerns of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women regarding stereotypes of women’s roles and responsibilities, and discrimination in land ownership. It called on the international community to support with capacity-building and technical assistance. 95. Guatemala noted Cameroon’s progress in human rights, demonstrated by ratifying OP-CAT, establishing a multi-level National Human Rights Education Programme and enacting a law on the protection and well-being of persons with disabilities. It made recommendations. 96. Haiti commended the contribution of Cameroon to the work of the Human Rights Council through the presentation of its UPR second cycle national report. It made recommendations. 97. Hungary acknowledged the ratification of OP-CAT and ILO Conventions Nos. 144 (1976) and 155 (1981), and its A-status accreditation. It shared the concerns of various special rapporteurs on the safety of human rights defenders and journalists. It welcomed its five-year action plan to combat FGM and commended the efforts to eradicate harmful practices. It made recommendations. 98. Indonesia welcomed the adoption by Cameroon of a National Plan of Action for Human Rights, its National Gender Policy, its five-year action plan for combating FGM and its legislation protecting persons with disabilities. It welcomed the establishment of the inter-ministerial committee for monitoring implementation of recommendations of international and regional mechanisms. It commended the actions in education and children’s rights. It made recommendations. 99. Ireland welcomed Cameroonian efforts to improve detention conditions, but noted concerns raised by the Committee against Torture (CAT) and encouraged Cameroon to repeal the decree on prison disciplinary measures. It recognized Cameroonian efforts to eradicate FGM and the updates made to the five-year action plan for the fight against FGM, but noted continued concerns on the issue. It made recommendations. 100. Italy commended Cameroon for measures to combat FGM, including its awareness-raising campaigns. It asked what steps it envisaged for combating FGM and other harmful practices. It noted the existence of a de facto moratorium on the death penalty and encouraged Cameroon to formalize it with a view to abolition. It requested further details on how Cameroon intended to prevent abuse of detainees or arrested persons and whether, and how, human rights training of law enforcement officials was conducted. 101. Kyrgyzstan noted the continued cooperation with OHCHR, treaty bodies and special procedures and welcomed the implementation of the Integrated Management of Child Illnesses Strategy and its measures to prevent; treat and care for persons with HIV. It considered that planning and budgeting measures were required in view of inadequacies in allocating and distributing public funding. It made recommendations. 102. Madagascar specifically noted the country’s progress in strengthening its legal and institutional frameworks to promote and protect human rights. It congratulated Cameroon for adopting legislation to strengthen independence of the National Commission for Human Rights and Freedoms and establishing an inter-ministerial Committee to monitor the fight against trafficking in persons. 103. Malaysia welcomed Cameroon’s progress in combating violence against women, children’s rights and poverty in response to UPR first-cycle recommendations, as well as in education, health, rights to food and of disabled persons. It commended Cameroon for adopting its growth and employment strategy paper. It appreciated the sincerity in highlighting the challenges it faced. It made recommendations. 104. Mali commended the Cameroonian Government for its work to strengthen capacity of the National Commission for Human Rights and Freedoms. It welcomed adoption of the National Plan of Action for Human Rights and noted the country’s legislative and administrative measures for the human rights training of judicial, law enforcement and military personnel. 105. Mauritania considered that Cameroon’s National report highlighted its progress through validation of its National Plan of Action for Human Rights and adoption of its strategy document for growth and employment. It noted the accession by Cameroon to all relevant African instruments and its OP-CAT ratification. It acknowledged that the Cameroonian media had contributed to information and public awareness campaigns specific to education, health, women and children. 106. Mexico highlighted the ratification of OP-CAT and the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW), encouraging continuing this process. It recognized legal initiatives to strengthen independence of the National Commission for Human Rights and Freedoms. It welcomed efforts for persons with disabilities’ welfare, and to combat violence and discrimination against women. It made recommendations. 107. Montenegro welcomed the country’s signing of the Rome Statute and OP-CAT and encouraged the completion of the process required to ratify these instruments. It commended Cameroon for combating FGM, and joined CEDAW and CAT in urging it to pass relevant legislations in that regard. It was concerned about prosecution and discrimination based on homosexual behaviour and urged to reinforce efforts to ensure safety of all human rights defenders. It made recommendations. 108. Morocco noted the initiative of Cameroon to strengthen its normative and institutional framework in relation to human rights. It commended Cameroon for its interest in protecting all vulnerable categories, in particular persons with disabilities. It congratulated it for its praiseworthy efforts to fight corruption through establishment of an important national system. 109. Myanmar expressed its appreciation of Cameroon’s comprehensive national report, prepared through a broad-based consultation process. It noted its adoption of a national human rights education programme. It made a recommendation. 110. The Netherlands noted Cameroonian work to promote women’s rights and combat violence and discrimination in all forms. It was alarmed about the situation of LGBT rights and the harsh prosecutions in cases of consensual relations between persons of the same sex. It made recommendations. 111. Nicaragua noted Cameroonian work on human rights such as health, education, housing and the right to food; the strategy on development and employment to guarantee food security; and the 2012 visit of the Special Rapporteur on food. It commended efforts to ensure universal and free education. It made a recommendation. 112. Niger noted the participatory approach in preparing the report and noted with satisfaction Cameroon’s endeavours to ratify most regional and international human rights instruments and its progress made in relation to UPR 1st cycle recommendations. It made recommendations. 113. Nigeria commended the Cameroonian authorities for their effort in preparing the National Report and progress in promoting and protecting human rights in the country. It made recommendations. 114. Oman noted that Cameroon’s National Report clarified measures taken by the Government to promote and protect human rights as evidenced by its ratification of multiple international conventions and adoption of a National Plan of Action for Human Rights. It made recommendations. 115. Philippines commended Cameroon for striving to meet its accepted recommendations despite the financial and other constraints. It commended Cameroon for taking measures to enhance human rights through legal and administrative reforms, greater judicial independence, protection of women’s and children’s rights and implementation of programmes addressing the right to health care. It made recommendations. 116. Poland appreciated laws to strengthen the national human rights commission’s compliance with the Paris Principles, but remained concerned about the situation of women and children in Cameroon. CEDAW had noted high rates of violence, harmful traditional practices and a lack of sufficient legal protection for women. Poland also noted serious problems involving exploitation, trafficking and violence involving children. It made recommendations. 117. The Republic of Moldova welcomed the adoption of measures to prevent and eliminate violence to women, strengthening of Cameroonian legislation in the area of children’s rights and efforts to improve birth registration. It made recommendations. 118. The Republic of Korea noted the ratification of several international instruments, including OP-CAT and OP-CRC-AC. It commended its efforts made to protect the rights of human rights defenders and persons with disabilities. It took note of the concerns expressed by the Human Rights Committee and CAT. It made recommendations. 119. The Russian Federation noted Cameroonian measures to ensure the rule of law, guarantee individual rights and freedoms and combat corruption. It asked of the reasons why it experienced ongoing difficulties in responding to requests from the Council’s special procedures within the established time frame. It made a recommendation. 120. Rwanda specifically noted the adoption of the growth and employment strategy for strengthening the rule of the law and achieving Millennium Development Goals. It commended Cameroonian measures to improve the judicial system, promote women’s rights and fight against violence and discrimination. It made recommendations. 121. Saudi Arabia noted the implementation of the commitments of Cameroon arising from conventions it ratified and of its voluntary commitments within the framework of the human rights system. It noted the adoption of some strategies and implementing policies in the area of food security that contributed to progress the supply of food and access to it. It made recommendations. 122. Senegal welcomed the strengthening of institutional and legal frameworks, improving of education and health services, and promoting of different social categories, especially women and children. Its work to eradicate FGM was noteworthy, in particular the retraining of former FGM practitioners. It made recommendations. 123. Sierra Leone acknowledged the ratification of regional and international conventions, including OP-CAT and OP-CRC-AC and its National Plan of Action for Human Rights. It took note of the steps taken to ensure the independence of its national human rights commission. It noted its actions leading to improvements in agriculture, education, health and housing, and human rights awareness-raising. It made recommendations. 124. Singapore welcomed Cameroonian efforts to improve access to education and resulting greater enrolment. It noted its success in implementing the National Strategic Plan for the fight against HIV/AIDS and STIs and the resulting reduction in HIV prevalence. It made recommendations. 125. With regard to the question raised by the Russian Federation concerning the difficulties experienced by Cameroon in responding to requests from the Council’s special procedures mandate holders, the delegation stated that it had been due to the time required to gather information and for consultation between the various structures concerned. 126. The delegation explained that, since 1986, steps had been taken to provide human rights training to law enforcement officials, to transform their attitudes and to introduce courses in all the institutions in which they were trained. 127. The delegation had reiterated the commitment of Cameroon to human rights and confirmed that the recommendations made to it would be taken into account and that extensive consultation of all sectors would be carried out in order to provide, before September, clear answers on the points that had been accepted and to fulfil all the commitments made. 128. The delegation emphasized once more that no professional journalist experienced any difficulty working in Cameroon and that a regulatory body, the National Communication Council, had been established. 129. With regard to the debate on homosexuality, the delegation recalled that all societies evolved, that Cameroon should be allowed the opportunity to continue on its path and that attitudes would change accordingly. 130. Lastly, the delegation called on the international community to support the efforts made by Cameroon. Its economy was recovering and major economic projects were under way but budgetary resources were limited and Cameroon needed the support of the international community in order to become a champion of human rights. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations** 131. The following recommendations will be examined by Cameroon which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the 24th session of the Human Rights Council in September 2013: 131.1 Ratify the OP-CRC-SC as well as the Optional Protocol to the CRC on a communications procedure (Slovakia); 131.2 Ratify OP-CRC-SC (Slovenia); 131.3 Ratify the Optional Protocol to CRC on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography and approve the Family Code to enhance the protection of the rights of children, especially with respect to the trafficking in minors (Spain); 131.4 Strengthen the legal foundations, including through ratification of relevant international human rights instruments such as the Optional Protocol to the CRC on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography (Indonesia); 131.5 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and therefore proceed with the abolishment of the death penalty once and for all (Spain); 131.6 Implement a complete abolition of the death penalty and accede to the Second Optional Protocol of the International Covenant on Civil and Political rights (Australia); 131.7 Commute without delay all existing death sentences and ratify Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR (Czech Republic); ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 131.8 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at abolition of the death penalty (Estonia); 131.9 Ratify Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR, aiming at abolishing the death penalty for all crimes or formalize the de facto moratorium on the death penalty (Montenegro); 131.10 Accede to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and adjust the legislation, and in the meantime, officially enshrine the current de facto moratorium on the death penalty (Uruguay); 131.11 Complete the process of accession to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Algeria); 131.12 Envisage ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 131.13 Continue the efforts made to ratify the following conventions: International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance; Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities; International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families; and Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Argentina); 131.14 Consider ratifying the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Armenia); 131.15 Ratify the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Estonia); 131.16 Consider ratifying the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Botswana); 131.17 Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the International Criminal Court (Estonia); 131.18 Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Guatemala); 131.19 Ratify the Rome Statute (Tunisia); 131.20 Initiate the procedure of ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearances and accede to the Rome Statute (France); 131.21 Reiterate the recommendation to ratify the Rome Statute, the International Convention for the Protection of all Persons from Enforced Disappearances and the Optional Protocol to the CRC on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography (Germany); 131.22 Take concrete and effective measures to ensure the ratification and gradual implementation as soon as possible of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, signed in 2007 (Canada); 131.23 Accede to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness (Djibouti); 131.24 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Haiti); 131.25 Deepen and widen its efforts, including through providing stronger legal framework by considering the ratification of the UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education (Indonesia); 131.26 Ratify the UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education (Djibouti); 131.27 Ratify the Hague Convention on the Protection of Children and Co.operation in Respect of Inter-country Adoption (Togo); 131.28 Ratify all other international instruments it agreed to ratify during its first UPR review (Hungary); 131.29 Remove from national legislation all provisions relating to the death penalty (Belgium); 131.30 Establish a national mechanism for the prevention of torture (Tunisia); 131.31 Enact specific legislation which prohibits and punishes racial discrimination (Mexico); 131.32 Reform the Penal Code to eliminate homosexuality as a criminal offence (Spain); 131.33 Adopt measures to decriminalise consensual sexual acts among adults of the same sex so as to adapt its legislation to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Uruguay); 131.34 Establish a moratorium on the implementation of Article 347bis of the Penal Code that “shall be punished by imprisonment of six months to five years and a fine a person who has sexual relations with a person of the same sex” and encourage non-violence towards all, regardless of sexual orientation, as well as the protection of defenders of these rights, including their lawyers (Canada); 131.35 Decriminalize consensual sexual relations between adults of the same sex (France); 131.36 Decriminalize same-sex relationships, protect LGBTI from violence from other members of the society and fight against prejudices against LGBTI persons by awareness raising campaigns (Germany); 131.37 Reiterate its recommendation made during the UPR in 2009 calling for decriminalization of homosexuality in Cameroon (Netherlands); 131.38 Decriminalise consensual sexual acts among adults of the same sex and adopt measures to eliminate social prejudices and stigmatization of homosexuality (Mexico); 131.39 Adopt a specific law to combat violence and discrimination against women which includes the prohibition of forced marriage as well as marital rape (Costa Rica); 131.40 Revise its legislation on the prevention and punishment of rape, with particular attention to marital rape (Belgium); 131.41 Criminalise the practice of female genital mutilation as an offence in its Penal Code (Spain); 131.42 Ensure the full implementation of the National Action Plan on Female Genital Mutilation, and enact the law criminalizing this practice that had been proposed in the revision of the Penal Code two years ago (Cyprus); 131.43 Implement specific legislation criminalising female genital mutilation and domestic violence (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 131.44 Adopt a law on female genital mutilation and other harmful practices against women and girls, by criminalising them specifically as offences (Uruguay); 131.45 Adopt a comprehensive public policy and law to eradicate female genital mutilation (Germany); 131.46 In line with its previously accepted UPR recommendation adopt legislation prohibiting FGM and continue to strengthen awareness raising on this issue (Hungary); 131.47 Continue and intensify efforts to eliminate all forms of discrimination and violence against women, including by adopting a national plan for the eradication of female genital mutilation (France); 131.48 Continue the measures undertaken to promote the rights of women, including the on-going work on a draft law on the prevention of and fight against violence against women (Cambodia); 131.49 Take adequate measures to strengthen the criminalization of female genital mutilation and enhance awareness of the population (Haiti); 131.50 Criminalise as an offence domestic violence, violence within marriage and all forms of sexual abuse, as well as prohibit and punish by law the practice of early and forced marriages (Mexico); 131.51 Adopt legislation on prevention of all forms of violence against women and gender-based discrimination (Poland); 131.52 Adopt the draft law on the prevention and elimination of violence against women (Republic of Moldova); 131.53 Further strengthen its efforts by enacting national legislation to prohibit harmful practices and strengthen its efforts to increase awareness on women’s rights (South Africa); 131.54 Continue its efforts with the view of the prompt approval of the legislation in the area of the protection of the rights of the child (Brazil); 131.55 Continue implementing the recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child on protecting street children (Egypt); 131.56 Adopt and implement, by the end of 2014, a law prohibiting all forms of violence against children, including harmful practices and ensure that such legislation is in line with international human rights standards (Ireland); 131.57 Adopt and implement stronger legislation on children’s rights (Philippines); 131.58 Enhance the legal protection of children against all types of violence and prohibit, through adequate legislative measures, all forms of corporal punishment (Poland); 131.59 Accelerate the adoption of the draft Code on the protection of the child and the draft Code on persons and family, (Republic of Moldova); 131.60 Double its efforts to conclude the adoption of the National work Plan for the promotion of human rights and start in the implementation (Sudan); 131.61 Further strengthen its national mechanisms for the protection of human rights (Uzbekistan); 131.62 Concentrate on the implementation of the international human rights treaties that have been ratified by the country (Afghanistan); 131.63 Take measures to legislate into domestic law the international human rights instruments to which it is a party (Australia); 131.64 Continue to ensure better protection of human rights through the implementation of laws and action plans recently adopted, which could effectively protect its citizens, particularly, those who are the most vulnerable (Cambodia); 131.65 Decriminalize defamation, reform the legislation regulating the press in order to ensure more freedom for journalists and writers (Germany); 131.66 Commit to ensure full compliance with Rule 62 of the Code of Criminal Procedure: “Public action is extinguished by res judicata” to prohibit any possibility that an individual is tried several times for the same offense (Canada); 131.67 Continue the process of ratifying international human rights instruments, which have been signed, as well as those that the country is not yet a party to (Côte d’Ivoire); 131.68 Maintain its positive efforts in the current process of reviewing its national laws with a view to bringing them in line with its international human rights obligations (Egypt); 131.69 Intensify its efforts to incorporate in its internal legal system international legal norms aiming at eliminating gender based discrimination (Niger); 131.70 Continue efforts to strengthen the independence of the National Commission for Human Rights and Freedoms and provide it with the necessary financial and human resources (Costa Rica); 131.71 Further strengthen the National Commission in accordance with the Paris Principles (Niger); 131.72 Maintain its high level of cooperation with OHCHR, Treaty Bodies and Special Procedures (Nigeria); 131.73 Seek further assistance for capacity building and technical assistance in the areas identified in the National Report (Sierra Leone); 131.74 Strengthen cooperation with the United Nations human rights mechanisms, particularly the United Nations special procedures mandate holders (Côte d’Ivoire); 131.75 Intensify the pace of cooperation with the treaty bodies (Niger); 131.76 Issue a standing invitation to special procedures (Slovenia); 
131.77 Issue a standing invitation to the mandate holders of the Council (Tunisia); 131.78 Extend an open and standing invitation to the Special Procedures of the United Nations (Chile); 131.79 Issue an open invitation to the Special Procedures (Guatemala); 131.80 Issue a standing invitation to all mandate holders and allow a visit by the Special Rapporteurs on Freedom of Opinion and Expression and on Human Rights Defenders (Hungary); 131.81 Extend a standing invitation to all thematic special procedures (Montenegro); 131.82 Extend a standing invitation to special procedures to visit Cameroon (Sierra Leone); 131.83 Continue its efforts to amend or repeal all discriminatory legislation, including discrimination regarding land ownership and to ensure the compatibility between customary law and statutory law (Bulgaria); 131.84 Undertake public actions aimed at eliminating discrimination based on sexual orientation (Spain); 131.85 Adopt appropriate measures to tackle social prejudices, stigmatization, harassment, discrimination and violence against individuals because of their sexual orientation (Uruguay); 131.86 Adopt necessary measures to avoid discrimination, and to protect and integrate the LGBT population (Argentina); 131.87 Take all necessary measures, including legislative and administrative, to prohibit and eliminate all discriminatory treatment based on sexual orientation (Belgium); 131.88 Adopt further legislative, administrative and other measures to eliminate discriminatory treatment on the basis of gender identity (Czech Republic); 131.89 Promote equal treatment before the law, including through social protection, the right to birth registration, and the right to an equal use of natural resources (Thailand); 131.90 Apply a strategy of universal registration of births (Republic of Moldova); 131.91 Launch a Universal Birth Registration Strategy to improve the level of birth registration in the country (Sierra Leone); 131.92 Take further steps leading to a formal abolition of the death penalty, commuting all existing sentences to life imprisonment terms (Slovakia); 131.93  Abolish the death penalty (Slovenia);  131.94  Abolish the death penalty (Togo);  131.95  Establish a de iure moratorium on executions (Belgium);  131.96  Abolish  the death  penalty  in order to  perpetuate  the de facto  moratorium on executions (France); 131.97 Consider the abolition of the death penalty (Rwanda); 131.98 Take effective and concrete measures to eradicate torture in prison bodies (Republic of Korea); 131.99 Investigate allegations of human rights abuses by the security forces and take measures to eliminate this practice, if required (Sierra Leone); 131.100 Allocate appropriate resources with a view to improve conditions in prisons and detention centres, in particular to address their infrastructural needs, inmates access to safe drinking water and food, sanitation, medical care as well as to legal counsel (Slovakia); 131.101 Accelerate the implementation and expand the scope of the measures of the programme for improving the conditions of detention, as well as reduce the duration of pre-trial detention (Cape Verde); 131.102 Keep on the current efforts to improve conditions of detention including limiting the over crowdedness of prisons (Egypt); 131.103 Further improve the prison conditions in the country (Ethiopia); 131.104 Continue efforts to ensure better living conditions in detention (France); 131.105 Continue to improve the conditions of detention (Senegal); 131.106 Refrain from arbitrary arrest and detention, and enforce existing Criminal Procedure Code provisions to limit pre-trial detention, in compliance with ICCPR obligations (United States of America); 131.107 Respect article 12 of the Constitution, which protects privacy, and eliminate abuses of this article that lead to arbitrary arrests and prosecutions on charges related to consensual same sex relations (United States of America); 131.108 Urgently repeal legislation criminalising consensual homosexual activity and release from detention individuals convicted of those offences (Australia); 131.109 Investigate police violence that took place on persons because of their actual or perceived sexual orientation (Belgium); 131.110 Ensure adequate protection of defenders of human rights that help LGBT persons (Belgium); 131.111 Continue to investigate acts of threats and aggression against human rights defenders and journalists and bring to justice those perpetrators (Spain); 131.112 Provide active and immediate protection for all human rights defenders (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 131.113 Make every effort to fully investigate all threats and attacks against human rights defenders and journalists and bring the perpetrators to justice (Czech Republic); 131.114 Abide by its UPR engagements made in 2009 by fully respecting and protecting the rights and freedoms of Human Rights Defenders and journalists and that no fines or prison sentences are imposed on persons for expressing political views or opposition to the current government (Hungary); 131.115 Provide adequate protection to human rights defenders at risk, especially involving the right to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and association (Ireland); 131.116 Ensure a favourable climate for the activities of journalists, human rights defenders and other actors of civil society (Tunisia); 131.117 Consider adopting specific laws or repealing existing legislation to combat violence against women (Thailand); 131.118 Intensify the awareness-raising and education campaigns for local authorities, families, traditional and religious leaders and the general population in order to effectively fight against the problem of early and forced marriages (Togo); 131.119 Prevent early and forced marriages (Uruguay); 131.120 Establish and implement laws and public health policy aimed at eradicating female genital mutilation (Belgium); 131.121 Continue to find effective measures to address concerns expressed by a number of treaty bodies, including the CRC, CEDAW and ILO Committee of Experts, regarding trafficking and exploitation of women and children for commercial purposes (Botswana); 131.122 Continue its action to eradicate the practice of female genital mutilation (Burundi); 131.123 Intensify its awareness-raising activities to eradicate female genital mutilation (Chile); 131.124 Further enhance the status of women, fight against violence against women, and eliminate harmful practices against women at an early date (China); 131.125 Continue in its endeavour in fighting against harmful traditional practices (Ethiopia); 131.126 Continue its efforts to ensure the total eradication of the harmful traditional practices of female genital mutilation (Rwanda); 131.127 Redouble efforts to eliminate the practices of female genital mutilation and breast ironing (Guatemala); 131.128 Strengthen efforts to fight against female genital mutilations (Senegal); 131.129 Further enhance its efforts in promoting gender equality, as well as combating all forms of gender-based violence (Malaysia); 131.130 Intensify its efforts in the area of the fight against violence, respect and discrimination against women (Netherlands); 131.131 Intensify efforts to promote women’s rights and fight violence and discrimination against women (Nigeria); 131.132 Continue efforts aimed at combating violence against women and providing information to women, family and society’s leaders regarding the adverse consequences of forced marriages and other forms of domestic violence, including in the framework of the 2012 campaign “Together, we will end domestic violence against women” (Russian Federation); 131.133 Take all the necessary measures to effectively eliminate and prevent all forms of exploitations and abuse of children, including through prosecution of those involved in such acts (Slovenia); 131.134 Intensify the policy and measures in the promotion of human rights for vulnerable groups, including the fight against racial discrimination and against trafficking and sexual exploitation of children (Viet Nam); 131.135 Continue taking efforts for the promotion and protection of the rights of children and other vulnerable groups of the society (Armenia); 131.136 Continue to face, with tenacity, the current and future challenges so that all its children, in particular, are free from any violation of their rights, especially their right to education (Comoros); 131.137 Strengthen its efforts to prevent all forms of violations of the rights of women and children, including sexual exploitation, child labour and human trafficking (Republic of Korea); 131.138 Seek for technical assistance to strengthen the capacity building of judicial officers, members of law enforcement forces and civil officials in the field of human rights and corruption, as well as the training of heads of committees responsible for fighting against corruption in all Ministries (Angola); 131.139 Respect provisions of existing laws governing freedoms of association assembly and expression, and eliminate abuse of provisions to limit political gatherings, union activity and criticism of the Government (United States of America); 131.140 Improve the conditions of workers and employers so as to enjoy their right to form their own organizations as well as to enjoy appropriate protection against any act of discrimination aimed at undermining freedom of association (Uruguay); 131.141 Ensure freedom of expression and the press by decriminalizing all press offenses and prosecuting all perpetrators of threats and attacks against human rights defenders and journalists (France); 131.142 Maintain and strengthen its efforts to promote the rights of women, stressing particularly the guarantee of equal opportunity in the labour market (Brazil); 131.143 Continue measures to protect and promote social rights (Uzbekistan); 131.144 Continue strengthening its policies in the field of economic, social and cultural rights with the aim to provide the best standard of living possible to its people, to which end it is very important to count on the cooperation and solidarity of the international community (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 131.145 Further improve conditions in social sectors (Zimbabwe); 131.146 Intensify programs to combat poverty (Algeria); 131.147 Continue to strengthen its cooperation with regional and international partners to pursue development programs to promote the socio-economic rights of its people (Philippines); 131.148 Continue its efforts in food supply and the possibility of making it available to its citizens (Saudi Arabia); 131.149 Continue to develop health services and further expand the coverage of safe drinking water and sanitation in order to better protect the right to health of its population (China); 131.150 Adopt all possible measures to reduce maternal and child mortality and to facilitate the access of women and adolescents to sexual and reproductive health services (Uruguay); 131.151 Continue implementing the Strategic National Plan to fight against HIV/AIDS and continue the actions aimed at improving the health service coverage (Cuba); 131.152 Double its efforts in combating HIV/AIDS (Oman); 131.153 Continue providing health care programmes to HIV/AIDS patients and work towards preventing its spread in the society (Saudi Arabia); 131.154 Continue to implement its HIV/AIDS prevention, care and treatment programmes to further reduce the prevalence rate (Singapore); 131.155 Continue to implement the 2011–2015 Health Sector Strategy (Kyrgyzstan); 131.156 Ensure women’s access to reproductive health services (Kyrgyzstan); 131.157 Continue to work towards improving child healthcare within the framework of its Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses Strategy (Nigeria); 131.158 Intensify and widen its campaign on the human rights education and awareness creation as well as address the challenges mentioned in its report (Uganda); 131.159 Further strengthen and expand its human rights education and awareness schemes (Zimbabwe); 131.160 Continue to conduct outreach activities to raise the awareness of people on human rights issues (Afghanistan); 131.161 Strengthen its efforts in the areas of Education with the view of increasing school enrolment rate (Ethiopia); 131.162 Continue investing in necessary infrastructures, which contribute to improve access to education for all (Nicaragua); 131.163 Continue its efforts in improving the level of education for girls (Oman); 131.164 Continue to place emphasis on promoting universal access to education and improving the quality of its education system (Singapore); 131.165 Review legislation such as the recently adopted Act on the protection and advancement of persons with disabilities to prohibit efficiently discrimination against persons with disabilities, to guarantee equal treatment and equal opportunity and protect them from harassment, violence and abuse in all aspects of life (Slovakia); 131.166 Continue its positive approach in further promoting the welfare and protecting the rights of persons with disabilities with a view of improving their living conditions (Malaysia); 131.167 Continue its policy aimed at the social integration of vulnerable groups such as Pygmies and Mbororos (Burundi); 131.168 Strengthen measures to promote the rights of indigenous populations of the country, particularly, with respect to their access to the citizenship, land, justice and education (Cape Verde); 131.169 Carry on with ensuring the access to health services for children and indigenous people (Egypt); 131.170 Continue its programme to enhance its capacity with regard to the human rights of state and civil society actors (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 131.171 Further enhance the human rights training programmes for law enforcement officials and other relevant stakeholders (Myanmar). 132. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex 
[English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of Cameroon was headed by H.E. Mr Pierre Moukoko Mbonjo, Minister of External Relations, and composed of the following members: • H.E. Mr. Anatole	 Fabien Marie Nkou, Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of Cameroon; Head of Experts’ Delegation; • H.E. Mr. Henri Léonard Bindzi, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary; • Mr. Aimé Parfait Bikoro, Chargé de Mission,	 General Secretariat of the Prime Minister; • Mr. Emmanuel Ndjere, General Secretary, Ministry of Communication; • Mr. Charles Nanga, General Inspector of Services, Ministry of National Education; • Ms. Cécile Thom, General Inspector No 4, General Delegation of National Security; • Mr. André Damien Nguimbous, General Inspector No 2, Ministry of Social Affairs; • Ms. Helen	 Galega, Director of Human Rights and International Cooperation, Ministry of Justice; • Ms. Scholastique Ngono, Head of Standards Division of International Cooperation, Ministry of Labour and Social Security; • Mr. Parfait Abouga Ndzana, Head of the Technical Cooperation Unit, Ministry of Labour and Social Security; • Mr. Parfait Zoa Mbida; Head of the Legal Unit, Ministry for the Promotion of Women and the Family; • Ms. Anne Chantal Nama, Deputy Director of United Nations Bodies Unit, Minister of External Relations; • Mr. Bertin Bidima, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of Cameroon. 