Distr.: General 3 January 2014 English Original: English/French General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-fifth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Chad * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.14-10021  (E)    240114 270114 *1410021* Contents 
Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–109 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–16 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 17–109 5 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 110–111 14 Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 25 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its seventeenth session from 21 October to 1 November 2013. The review of Chad was held at the 13th meeting on 29 October 2013. The delegation of Chad was headed by Raoul Laouna Gong, Minister of Human Rights and the Promotion of Fundamental Freedoms. At its 18th meeting, held on 31 October 2013, the Working Group adopted the report on Chad. 2. On 14 January 2013, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Chad: Benin, Ecuador and the United Arab Emirates. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Chad: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/17/TCD/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/17/TCD/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/17/TCD/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by the Czech Republic, Germany, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, Slovenia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America was transmitted to Chad through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR). I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation began by describing the importance Chad attached to human rights issues and its great willingness to meet all the commitments that it had freely entered into. 6. The delegation then drew attention to the establishment in 2005 of a Ministry of Human Rights and listed several conventions and treaties signed and ratified by Chad in 2009. They included the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime; the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography and on the involvement of children in armed conflict; the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol; the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families; the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. In addition, Chad had ratified several legal instruments at the regional level.  7. The delegation reported that significant progress had been made in incorporating the provisions of international instruments ratified by Chad into domestic law. Accordingly, several pieces of national legislation had been enacted while others were in the process of being adopted, such as the Personal and Family Code, the Criminal Code, the Code of Criminal Procedure, the Civil Code, the Code of Civil Procedure, the Child Protection Code and the Code of Conduct for Soldiers. 8. The delegation explained that the national report was the result of a multi-agency, participatory process. The report had been drafted by the interministerial committee to monitor the implementation of international human rights instruments (made up of representatives of various ministries, civil society, the National Human Rights Commission and resource persons) and by human rights associations. It had then been adopted by the Government. 9. The delegation noted that the Government, in collaboration with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), had taken a series of actions and measures concerning children in armed conflict. In that regard, the delegation mentioned in particular the plans to train 400 members of the contingents for Mali and the Central African Republic before the end of the year; missions to check the age of soldiers, conducted jointly by the Government and the United Nations, in security and defence zones; a programme for family reunification and the reintegration of children withdrawn from armed forces and armed groups, and the appointment of a focal point in the Ministry of Defence for the implementation of the plan of action. 10. With regard to trafficking in children, the delegation stated that there was no trafficking as such in Chad but that some situations that were tantamount to trafficking were punished if they came to the attention of the government authorities (for example, the Zoé’s Ark case). The delegation also mentioned that an order providing for the establishment of an interministerial technical committee to combat trafficking in persons had been issued on 17 October 2013. The Committee would be responsible, inter alia, for monitoring compliance with obligations in relation to trafficking in persons, proposing amendments to national legislation to bring it into line with international instruments and coordinating the activities of the relevant departments. 11. The delegation also reported that a draft decree regulating child labour was in the process of being adopted to supplement and clarify the provisions on the protection of children contained in the Labour Code. 12. The delegation recalled that the duration of police custody was 48 hours, and that it could be extended to 72 hours by the prosecutor. In order to protect citizens’ rights, the draft Code of Criminal Procedure provided that legal assistance should be available during that period and that pretrial detention was 6 months for ordinary offences and 1 year for serious offences. 13. The delegation noted that press offences had been decriminalized under the Act of 31 November 2010. Freedom of the press was guaranteed by a number of legal and institutional mechanisms introduced by the Government. Journalists were, however, expected to practise their profession without inciting citizens to hatred or violence. 14. With regard to women, the delegation noted that the Government had taken a number of actions to strengthen the protection of women’s rights. For example, a national gender policy and a national strategy to combat gender-based violence had been approved. The delegation also reported that the Government had established penalties for the perpetrators of violence against women in articles 325 ff. of the draft Criminal Code. Penalties for the perpetrators of female genital mutilation had also been provided for in that draft. It was specified, however, that female genital mutilation was practised by only a few ethnic groups in Chad, and that the Government had wished to introduce penalties in its national legislation in order to comply with its international obligations. The delegation also mentioned a number of measures taken for women, including a national campaign to combat all forms of violence against women, the increasing empowerment of women in decision-making bodies and the construction of a women’s centre in N’Djamena to strengthen women’s capacity to exercise their rights. 15. The delegation noted that, with the support of the European Union, Chad had undertaken an in-depth reform of the justice system through the Programme to Support Justice in Chad (PRAJUST). The delegation mentioned, inter alia, the construction of court buildings, the establishment of a legal aid centre to assist disadvantaged people in legal proceedings; the construction or refurbishment of more than 10 detention centres; the launch of an information and public awareness-raising campaign on access to the law and to justice; specific measures for the social reintegration of prisoners; the establishment of a national institute for judicial training (with a course for training prison administrators, supervisors and warders); and a review of all of the existing codes, including the draft Criminal Code. 16. The delegation stated that, although considerable progress had been made, much remained to be done given the variety of difficulties faced, including ingrained sociocultural attitudes, limited financial resources and the lack of qualified human resources. However, despite those difficulties, Chad was committed to stepping up its efforts and allocating all available resources to ensure that the promotion and protection of human rights were an absolute priority for the Government. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 17. During the interactive dialogue, 73 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 18. Slovenia commended Chad for its standing invitation to all special procedures. It encouraged continued implementation of the action plan on children and armed conflict and expressed concern about underreporting of sexual and gender-based violence and the persistent culture of impunity. Slovenia made recommendations. 19. South Africa encouraged Chad to pursue steps to enhance the protection of women’s rights and eliminate all forms of discrimination against women. It welcomed efforts to combat poverty and improve the health and education sectors. It made recommendations. 20. South Sudan noted progress in strengthening human rights and called on the international community to provide more technical assistance and financial support to help Chad meet its obligations to promote and protect human rights. It made recommendations. 21. Spain applauded the adoption of the Lake Chad Water Charter and offered its cooperation to ensure efficient and concerted water resource management. It expressed concern about the situation of women and girls. Spain made recommendations. 22. Germany expressed concern over numerous human rights violations affecting children. It asked what concrete measures were planned to raise awareness about human rights for children and punish violations. Germany made recommendations. 23. Thailand commended Chad for its ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography and its initiatives to strengthen prisoners’ rights. It remained concerned about discrimination against persons with HIV/AIDS and requested information on the number of people living with HIV/AIDS and relevant measures that had been adopted. Thailand urged the international community assist Chad and encouraged Chad to continue engaging with the United Nations treaty bodies. It made recommendations. 24. Togo commended Chad for its commitment to settling conflict and ensuring lasting peace. It noted improvements resulting from the ratification of international instruments such as the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography. Togo made recommendations. 25. Tunisia encouraged intensified efforts to eliminate all forms of violence against women and urged OHCHR and the international community to respond to requests from Chad for technical assistance, including opening an OHCHR office in N’Djamena. It made recommendations. 26. Turkey commended the Government for its commitment to national dialogue on development and the political will to hold free elections. It noted the commitment to providing a safe environment for refugees and displaced persons on the southern and eastern borders. Turkey made recommendations. 27. The United Arab Emirates noted judicial reforms, the enactment of new legislation, such as the Act on Civil Status, and amendments to the Criminal Code. It welcomed awareness-raising efforts. It requested information on measures adopted in the areas of rehabilitation and the training of the judiciary. It made a recommendation. 28. The United Kingdom called for an end to impunity and expressed concern over interference from the executive in judicial matters and a proposed revision of the media law. Freedom of expression and a safer environment for journalists were paramount. It made recommendations. 29. The United States acknowledged security sector reforms, but was concerned about sexual violence against women and girls, the lack of resources for policing in refugee hosting areas and persistently poor prison conditions and treatment of prisoners. It made recommendations. 30. Uruguay noted the ratification of international human rights instruments, efforts to protect boys, girls and adolescents, legislative developments to strengthen the rule of law, and the pending bill to strengthen the National Human Rights Commission. Uruguay made recommendations. 31. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela noted measures taken since 2010 to improve health care and legislation governing the media, including strengthening freedom of expression, and to increase literacy and school attendance rates for girls. It made a recommendation. 32. Viet Nam noted the close cooperation between Chad and international organizations, particularly regarding children’s rights, and its work with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) to combat the recruitment of child soldiers. It encouraged Chad to increase efforts to ensure human rights were respected and urged international and regional bodies to provide close cooperation. Viet Nam also noted the National Strategy to Combat Gender Violence. 33. Yemen took note of the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict and other international instruments. It recognized the creation of national action plans on human rights, the use of children in armed conflict and violence against women and the implementation of a health development programme. 34. Zimbabwe noted the improved normative framework to incorporate international instruments into domestic legislation. It commended programmes to strengthen the education system, improve health and reduce poverty. It acknowledged judicial reform and encouraged awareness-raising on access to justice. Zimbabwe made recommendations. 35. Algeria welcomed the implementation of several human rights instruments, the action plan to address the use of children in armed conflict and the National Development Plan. It noted progress in economic, social and cultural rights and appealed to the international community for capacity-building and technical assistance. Algeria made recommendations. 36. Angola applauded the judicial reform, the adoption of a national policy on gender and the creation of an interministerial follow-up committee on international agreements. It made a recommendation. 37. Argentina welcomed the ratification of the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the adoption of a national human rights action plan. It encouraged Chad to amend the Criminal Code to include a definition of torture and criminalize all acts of torture. Argentina made recommendations. 38. Armenia praised the improved access to health care, particularly the provision of free maternal and child health care. It noted progress in education, the adoption of a national policy on gender and a campaign to combat discrimination against women. Armenia made recommendations. 39. Australia expressed concern over the incidence of rape and violence against women and girls. It welcomed the directive on the illegal recruitment of children and punishment for recruiters and acknowledged the important role played by civil society, journalists and opposition parties in ensuring democracy. Australia made recommendations. 40. Azerbaijan welcomed the ratification of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography. It noted improvements in the respect of women’s and children’s rights and judicial reforms. It applauded the establishment of the judicial reform support programme and the national judges’ training school. Azerbaijan made recommendations. 41. Bangladesh noted progress made in the health sector and in combating poverty. It welcomed the creation of the National Youth Support Fund for entrepreneurship. It urged the United Nations and the international community to provide Chad with technical assistance. 42. Benin noted legislative and institutional reforms, especially the adoption of new legal codes, efforts to bring the National Human Rights Commission into line with the principles relating to the status of national institutions (Paris Principles), the recognition of the opposition’s status and a new dialogue framework. It also noted substantial progress on the rights of women and children. Benin made a recommendation. 43. Botswana welcomed the ratification of human rights instruments, including the Organized Crime Convention, the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Kampala Convention and noted the legislative and institutional reforms to protect human rights. It encouraged Chad to pursue its national development and other action plans and to strengthen protection measures for journalists. Botswana made recommendations. 44. Brazil praised the ratification of international instruments on children’s rights and the progress made in judicial reform and reducing illiteracy, reflecting the willingness to promote and protect human rights. Brazil was concerned that Chad had not yet acceded to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. It requested information on the effectiveness of policies to tackle food insecurity. Brazil made recommendations. 45. Burkina Faso commended the Government for its ongoing inclusive social dialogue and for extending a permanent invitation to the special procedures. It called on the international community to support Chad in its efforts to promote and protect human rights. It made recommendations.  46. The delegation had taken note of the questions put by States in their interventions concerning women and children, justice reform, making the National Human Rights Commission compliant with the Principles relating to the Status of National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights (Paris Principles), journalists and prisoners, and people living with HIV. The delegation pointed out that Chad had made major efforts to address all those problems. However, the delegation added that it had not come to the meeting simply to say that everything had been achieved and that there were no implementation problems. In Chad, as in all countries emerging from a period of unrest, everything was a priority. It was difficult to promote and protect human rights if the reform of the administration remained unresolved, if justice reform was not complete and if the security services and the army were not under control. Despite the pressure to address all its priorities, human rights had always been a key concern for the Government of Chad. The delegation also noted that sociocultural attitudes could not be changed overnight nor would they disappear simply because a decree or a law was enacted. Changing traditions took time.  47. With regard to justice reform, the delegation explained that the national institute for the judiciary had been set up by the Government of Chad with a view to strengthening national rights and ensuring that judges were aware of rights under domestic law and under international law adopted by Chad. 48. The delegation noted that Chad had launched a full-scale birth registration campaign and that a national programme to regularize civil status records throughout the country was under way. As a result, 200,000 births had been registered in 2013. 49. With regard to the possibility of discrimination against persons living with HIV, the delegation stated that there was a law to protect persons living with HIV.  50. With regard to the press, the delegation recalled that the order of 2008, which had given rise to discussion, debate and controversy, had been amended in 2010. That law was not perfect, and if it emerged that changes were necessary, they would be made in the interests of democracy and the protection of human rights. In addition, discussions were under way with the relevant professional associations as to whether any changes were necessary.  51. In response to a number of speakers who had called on Chad to continue the reform of the National Human Rights Commission to ensure that it was in compliance with the Paris Principles, the delegation said that there was no cause for concern. The bill was with the Council of Ministers and would be adopted before the end of 2013. The bill had been delayed because the Government had wanted to achieve a consensus in all sectors. 52. With regard to food policy, the delegation mentioned that the Government had launched a Millennium Development Goals acceleration framework in September 2013 with a view to eradicating food insecurity and reducing malnutrition rates. However, much remained to be done if the people of Chad were to be able to feed themselves adequately.  53. The delegation noted that political dialogue was inclusive and that the opposition as a whole was represented in the National Framework for Political Dialogue. Civil society, trade unions, women’s associations and human rights associations were also represented in the National Framework. The Framework was in the process of preparing the Independent National Electoral Commission, made up of 17 members from the majority, 17 members of the opposition and 6 members from civil society. The delegation stressed that the democratic process was progressing, that there was real political debate, and that all political opinions, both from the majority and from the opposition, were represented.  54. In addition, the delegation reported that there was ongoing dialogue between the Government and trade unions in order to avoid crises and to organize meetings to find solutions to concerns as they arose. 55. Returning to questions on the press, the delegation noted that in any new democracy, the press was not entirely sure of its role in the democratic process and that even the Government was still finding its way in that area. As a result, conflicts could arise, but the courts were in place to set things on the right track if necessary, or to deal with complaints — often lodged by individuals — and the judicial system had demonstrated its independence in that area. The delegation stressed that the Government understood that a free press served the interests of democracy and the people. However, journalists had to be trained and the Government was working for that, through the Higher Council for Communication, which was made up of representatives of the press, the Government and the National Assembly. There was also a professional association that reprimanded members if the press made mistakes. 56. With regard to violence against women, the delegation drew attention to the establishment of a national coordinating body for prevention and protection pursuant to an order issued in 2010. Such violence was now punishable but there was also a need to raise public awareness, as nothing would be achieved if punishment was not accompanied by education. Accordingly, the Government had launched a national awareness-raising campaign based on publications such as “United against violence against women” and the Code of Conduct for Soldiers. 57. Burundi welcomed achievements in health, especially involving women, children and people living with HIV/AIDS. It noted measures to combat discrimination against women and gender-based violence, including female genital mutilation (FGM). Burundi made a recommendation. 58. Canada asked Chad to detail its measures to combat the recruitment and use of children by armed groups and to facilitate their reintegration. It recognized the importance of the country’s commitment to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. Canada made recommendations. 59. Cape Verde noted the accession to international human rights instruments, including the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the positive impact of human rights legislation and national plans to combat child recruitment and violence against women and ensure gender equality. It made recommendations. 60. The Central African Republic commended Chad for its cooperation with UNICEF in combating the recruitment of child soldiers, its national strategy incorporating women’s concerns over gender-based violence and the building or refurbishment of hospitals offering free emergency care to all, without discrimination, and health-care facilities. It made a recommendation. 61. China acknowledged the Government’s plans to enhance economic, social and agricultural and environmental development, and to promote equality and reduce poverty. It recognized the signing of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. China made recommendations. 62. Comoros commended Chad for strengthening political dialogue as a means of extending civil peace and constitutional order, promoting the right to education and access to justice, and working to achieve the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). It made recommendations. 63. The Congo noted that Chad had acceded to several international human rights instruments, implemented a programme supporting judicial reform and adopted a national human rights action plan and a policy to combat the use of children in armed conflict. It made a recommendation. 64. Costa Rica welcomed the establishment of the interministerial follow-up committee on international agreements and the training school for judges. It urged Chad to establish its National Human Rights Commission, despite limited human and financial resources, and to institute a moratorium on the death penalty. Costa Rica made recommendations. 65. Côte d’Ivoire welcomed reforms to improve human rights, particularly on security, health, education and the judicial and prison systems, and praised the initiatives to promote social dialogue, reduce poverty and increase press freedom. It made recommendations. 66. Cuba noted the priority given to combating poverty, inequality and social exclusion and to environmental protection, rural development and building economic infrastructure. It welcomed the alignment of education policy to the MDGs. Cuba made recommendations. 67. The Czech Republic welcomed the signature of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture. It was concerned about violence, corruption, prison overcrowding and conditions, the continuing harassment of human rights defenders and journalists and repression of freedom of expression, the weak enforcement of the ban on FGM and sexual violence perpetrated by peacekeeping forces. It made recommendations. 68. The Democratic Republic of the Congo commended Chad for the major reforms it had instituted, including in the legal and institutional frameworks, in response to the first cycle of UPR recommendations. It noted that protection of vulnerable groups, especially women and children, had been strengthened. It made recommendations. 69. Djibouti noted measures adopted for vulnerable groups. It encouraged Chad to continue fighting all forms of discrimination, especially against women and children. It asked what measures had been adopted to monitor the implementation of the National Gender Policy. Djibouti made a recommendation. 70. Egypt welcomed measures to promote and protect civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, including those of women and children. It made recommendations. 71. Ethiopia noted the implementation of a number of recommendations from the first UPR cycle and the commitment of Chad to the UPR. It welcomed measures to uphold and strengthen civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, including those of women and children. Ethiopia made recommendations. 72. France welcomed the efforts made since the first UPR cycle, including signing the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and committing to prohibit the recruitment of child soldiers. It made recommendations. 73. Gabon welcomed the legislative amendment on the creation of the National Human Rights Commission bringing it into line with the Paris Principles. It encouraged further reforms to strengthen economic, social, cultural and women’s and children’s rights. It called upon the international community to support Chad in implementing the UPR recommendations. 74. Switzerland commended Chad for its cooperation with the Extraordinary African Chambers under Senegalese jurisdiction, but was concerned about the independence of the judiciary. It commended Chad for not having applied the death penalty since 2003. It was concerned about restrictions on freedom of expression and opinion, especially those imposed on journalists and the media. Switzerland made recommendations. 75. Hungary encouraged Chad to strengthen the National Human Rights Commission, providing it with adequate human and financial resources to ensure that all torture allegations were investigated. Hungary was concerned at continued violence against children in the home, in schools, and in penal and alternative care institutions. Hungary asked how the draft legislation on family and child protection and the proposed amendments to the Criminal Code would address the issue. It made recommendations. 76. India welcomed the ratification of the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and other human rights instruments. It encouraged continued engagement with international bodies and mechanisms and the international community to overcome the remaining challenges to human rights promotion and protection. India made a recommendation. 77. Indonesia applauded the adoption of the national human rights action plan, the national gender policy and the National Development Plan. It made recommendations. 78. Ireland commended Chad for ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, but noted that child soldiers continued to be recruited and that children’s participation in education remained poor. It encouraged cooperation with special procedures mandate holders and urged Chad to submit its overdue reports to the treaty bodies. Ireland made recommendations. 79. Italy welcomed the ratification of the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child. It welcomed the de facto moratorium on executions, but asked whether there were plans to amend the Criminal Code with a view to abolishing the death penalty. Italy made recommendations. 80. Libya noted with satisfaction the efforts Chad was making to combat poverty, reduce illiteracy and reform the judiciary. It made a recommendation. 81. Madagascar praised the ratification of international instruments and the implementation of initiatives regarding health, justice, education, employment and women’s and children’s rights. It urged Chad to continue fighting poverty. Madagascar made recommendations. 82. Malaysia welcomed the progress achieved in health, combating poverty and protecting women’s and children’s rights. It appreciated the establishment of the National Development Plan and national campaigns to combat violence against women. It made recommendations. 83. The Maldives noted the progress made by Chad in ratifying international human rights instruments, particularly the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child. It made recommendations. 84. Mali encouraged Chad to build on its achievements by continuing to promote civil liberties and individual freedoms. It recognized the contribution Chad had made to the fight against terrorism and organized crime. It invited the international community to support Chad in its efforts to protect human rights. 85. Mauritania welcomed the cooperation of Chad with United Nations human rights mechanisms and policies developed to combat child labour and domestic violence. It underlined the country’s endeavours to fulfil its international obligations concerning freedom of expression and to counter the intimidation of journalists. 86. Mexico welcomed the national human rights action plan and the progress made in resettling and ensuring the security of refugees in Chad. It noted the discussions under way to develop a children’s code and encouraged its prompt adoption. Mexico made recommendations. 87. Montenegro commended Chad for the adoption of a national policy against the use of children in armed conflicts. It expressed concern about persistent harmful cultural norms and practices and asked what concrete steps had been or would be taken to raise the minimum age for marriage for women. It strongly encouraged action to reduce child and maternal mortality. Montenegro made recommendations. 88. Morocco welcomed the progress made by Chad to improve its human rights situation through institutional and legislative reform and the entry into force of the national human rights action plan. It recommended that the international community assist Chad to strengthen the National Human Rights Commission and the interministerial follow-up committee on international agreements. 89. The Netherlands congratulated Chad on its national strategy to combat gender violence, but noted that violence against women remained widespread. It noted that the freedom of the press was now enshrined in the Constitution. It made recommendations. 90. Niger welcomed the adoption of policies on economic, social and cultural rights and the ratification of regional and international human rights instruments and the intention to incorporate them into domestic legislation. Niger encouraged Chad to ensure access to education and health care. Niger made recommendations. 91. Nigeria noted the ratification of several human rights instruments and the implementation of several programmes and policies aimed at strengthening and promoting human rights. It made recommendations. 92. Oman noted that Chad had acceded to several international human rights instruments. It welcomed measures adopted to improve education and health and highlighted efforts to combat poverty and protect women’s and children’s rights. 93. Pakistan welcomed the ratification of international instruments, including the Organized Crime Convention, the Trafficking Protocol and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography. It noted that the national human rights action plan and judicial reforms would contribute further to promoting and protecting human rights. Pakistan made recommendations. 94. The Philippines called on the international community to continue assisting Chad to strengthen its human rights institutions. It welcomed ratification of the Organized Crime Convention, the Trafficking Protocol and the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and the priority given to eradicating harmful traditional practices. It made recommendations. 95. Romania encouraged Chad to expedite its judicial reform. It was concerned that child labour persisted and that measures to promote and protect women’s rights remained at the drafting stage. Romania made recommendations. 96. Rwanda commended Chad for amending its legislative and institutional framework and ratifying international human rights instruments. It noted the creation of the Office of the Ombudsman, the establishment of a national gender policy and the campaign to combat all forms of violence against women. Rwanda made recommendations. 97. Senegal congratulated Chad on measures adopted to bolster children’s rights, ensure access to justice for the most vulnerable, combat violence against women and ensure its people’s enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights. Senegal made recommendations. 98. Sierra Leone recognized the hospitality Chad provided in hosting refugees from neighbouring countries, its efforts to address the problem of child soldiers and its signature and ratification of international human rights instruments. It called for those legislative achievements to be translated into action. It made recommendations.  99. Singapore noted the cooperation of Chad with the United Nations Development Programme to implement a programme to strengthen judicial services, human rights and gender equality. It highlighted efforts to further improve the gender policy and improve child protection and education. Singapore made recommendations. 100. Sudan commended Chad for acceding to international and regional human rights instruments. It noted steps to combat poverty and develop microcredit programmes and highlighted measures to improve the situation of children. Sudan made recommendations.  101. Uganda noted the adoption of legislative and administrative measures to promote and protect human rights and the cooperation of Chad with international mechanisms and civil society. It called on the international community to address the challenges faced by Chad. Uganda made recommendations. 102. In response to the question on child soldiers, the delegation recalled that the Government had worked with a special United Nations team to carry out checks in at least eight security and defence zones in the country. There were no longer any child soldiers and steps would be taken to ensure that there never would be again. However, the issue remained a challenge for Chad, as it was not enough to withdraw child soldiers, they had to be reintegrated. The authorities, in cooperation with UNICEF, were working to ensure that reintegration was successful.  103. Returning to the references made to the law on the press, the delegation reiterated that there was no definitive law and that if it transpired that the 2010 law was inadequate in any respect, amendments could be considered in consultation with the relevant stakeholders.  104. With regard to the death penalty, the delegation noted that it was not enough simply to enact legislation, but that attitudes needed to be changed and that, when the time was right, the State would decide what it needed to do in that regard.  105. The delegation also stressed the problem of the weight of custom and tradition, which was a constraint on women’s and children’s rights. The reason for the delay in introducing legislation in that area was that it was necessary to work on changing mindsets before laws were enacted. Legislative measures should reflect the will of the people.  106. With respect to the events of February 2008, the delegation noted that it was a judicial problem and that the Chadian authorities had provided the resources for the justice system to carry out investigations entirely independently. Efforts had also been made to compensate the victims of sexual violence.  107. The delegation said that the authorities had approved the national gender policy, which would soon be formally adopted. With regard to violence against women, awareness-raising campaigns had been conducted in all regions of the country in cooperation with the United Nations Population Fund. 108. With regard to education, the delegation reported that the 1996 law provided for free public education and promoted girls’ education. In addition, the Government had begun a reform of the education system and set up a mechanism for pooling resources, an agency for the promotion of community education initiatives to which the State, partners and parents’ associations contributed resources for the running of schools according to their needs. Progress was also being made in the area of literacy, and the authorities would be taking steps to create a literacy support fund.  109. On the subject of health, the delegation noted that 13 per cent of the national budget was allocated to health, and thanked Cuba for having made 47 doctors available to Chad and agreed to train 157 Chadian doctors. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations** 110. The following recommendations will be examined by Chad which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-fifth session of the Human Rights Council in March 2014: 110.1 Ratify the international human rights instruments that had been signed but not yet ratified (Costa Rica); 110.2 Continue the ratification of international legal instruments on human rights which it is not yet a party to, in order to bring its legislation in line with universally acceptable standards (Benin); 110.3 Ratify the treaties that Chad has signed in the field of human rights (Togo); 110.4 Take further steps for the implementation of the ratified international treaties (Azerbaijan); 110.5 Accede to the human rights protocols and conventions that it has not acceded to (Libya); 110.6 Continue the process of ratification of international instruments on human rights (Niger); 110.7 Continue with the ratification of international treaties as they deem appropriate (Uganda); 110.8 Consider pursuing ratification of more international human rights conventions (Philippines); 110.9 Ratify a number of international legal instruments and the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and align its national laws with international standards regarding the abolition of the death penalty (Hungary); 110.10 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Uruguay); 110.11 Abolish the death penalty for all crimes and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Australia); 110.12 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Djibouti); 110.13 Abolish the death penalty and ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on the Civil and Political Rights (France); ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 110.14 Consider ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Rwanda); 110.15 Become a party to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Convention on Civil and Political Rights (Montenegro); 110.16 Sign the Optional Protocol to the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Spain); 110.17 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and align its national laws with international standards regarding the prohibition of torture (Hungary); 110.18 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Togo); 110.19 Speed up the ratification process for the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, as well as the integration of the provisions of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court into its national legislation (Tunisia); 110.20 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment without delay (Czech Republic); 110.21 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (France); 110.22 Sign the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, thus ensuring effective protection of women against the different types of violence exercised towards them (Spain); 110.23 Consider ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure to further enhance child protection (Thailand); 110.24 Further strengthen the legal framework for the promotion and protection of human rights, including by completing the ratification process of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and the Members of Their Families ant the Convention of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Indonesia); 110.25 Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Central African Republic); 110.26 Consider ratifying the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Rwanda); 110.27 Ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Togo); 110.28 Consider ratifying the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Armenia); 110.29 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Argentina); 110.30 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (France); 110.31 Speed up the adoption of the Family and Personal Code enshrining the rights of women (Tunisia); 110.32 Adopt the Code on the Protection of Children (Burkina Faso); 110.33 Ensure the completion of the legislative process on the Code on the Protection of Children (France); 110.34 Accelerate the process of harmonizing its national legislation with the provisions of the international instruments, to which it is a party (Zimbabwe); 110.35 Continue its efforts in harmonizing its national legislation with the human rights instruments to which Chad is a party (Oman); 110.36 Draw up a national plan of action for human rights as recommended by the National Forum on Human Rights held in March 2010 (Nigeria); 110.37 Continue with measures the Government is taking to meet the challenges the country faces in the field of human rights in order to consolidate the progress that has been achieved (Nigeria); 110.38 Take measures to readjust its domestic laws to align them with the international human rights conventions it has acceded to (Sierra Leone); 110.39 Continue its efforts in the promotion and protection of human rights (Madagascar); 110.40 Complete the process of adoption of the revised Law on the National Human Rights Commission so that its structure and mandate are consistent with the Paris Principles (Niger); 110.41 Step up the necessary measures to strengthen the powers of the National Human Rights Commission, in conformity with the Paris Principles, providing it with human and financial resources, independence and pluralism in its composition (Uruguay); 110.42 Adopt the law on the compliance of the National Human Rights Commission with the Paris Principles (Burkina Faso); 110.43 Continue efforts towards strengthening the National Human Rights Commission to ensure its effective functioning, including the development of a national plan of action for human rights (Botswana); 110.44 Ensure compliance of the National Human Rights Commission with the Paris Principles (France); 110.45 Take appropriate measures to institute a National Human Rights Commission with a clear and independent mandate that is in line with the Paris Principles (India); 110.46 Strengthen the independence, pluralism and resources of the National Human Rights Commission (Mexico); 110.47 Intensify efforts to improve funding and capacity building for the National Human Rights Commission (Nigeria); 110.48 Continue to strengthen the National Human Rights Commission (Pakistan); 110.49 Step up efforts in strengthening its National Human Rights Commission in line with the Paris Principles (Philippines); 110.50 Ensure the provision of technical and financial resources to the National Human Rights Commission to enable it to operate effectively and compliant with the Paris Principles and distinguish its roles and responsibilities from that of the Ministry of Human Rights (Sierra Leone); 110.51 Strengthen its national human rights mechanism, including by ensuring its adherence to the Paris Principles (Indonesia); 110.52 Take further steps to bring the National Human Rights Institution in line with the Paris Principles (South Africa); 110.53 Review the status and functioning of its National Human Rights Institution to make sure that it is consistent with the Paris Principles (Tunisia); 110.54 Continue, diversify and strengthen its policy for the promotion of women and the protection of children (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 110.55 Continue its efforts to protect the rights of women and children (Congo); 110.56 Proceed with a revision of national legislation to make the equality between men and women a reality (Romania); 110.57 Continue to apply programmes and measures to tackle the challenges that Chad has been facing since 2009, particularly when it comes to child labour, violence against women and entrenched poverty (Cuba); 110.58 Intensify the implementation of its laws, policies and programmes aimed at combating violence against women (Philippines); 110.59 With the support of relevant international organizations, continue to implement policies to enhance gender equality and the domestic framework to protect the rights of women and children (Singapore); 110.60 Ensure the full implementation of the National Gender Policy by allocating appropriate resources in accordance with the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Angola); 110.61 Adopt the new Criminal Code, including the article 273 and the following ones that envisage and repress female genital mutilation (FGM) (Burkina Faso); 110.62 Take measures to eliminate traditional practices that are in contradiction with human rights obligations (Costa Rica); 110.63 Speed up the adoption of the national gender policy approved since 2011 (Burundi); 110.64 Continue strengthening measures aimed at addressing impunity for sexual and gender-based violence, including expediting the adoption of the national gender policy and the national strategy to combat gender-based violence (Botswana); 110.65 Develop new strategies to overcome the difficulties posed by traditional and customary practices which lie in the way of promoting human rights (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 110.66 Create independent focal points on the human rights of children to monitor and ensure the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Optional Protocols thereto (Germany); 110.67 Speed up the procedure to adopt a Code on the Protection of Children (Togo); 110.68 Enact the Child Protection Code (United States of America); 110.69 Continue efforts to implement the Second National Comprehensive Action Plan to fight the worst forms of child labour, exploitation and trafficking of children for the period 2012-2015 (Algeria); 110.70 Continue implementing its child protection package, including the adoption of the Code on the Protection of Children and the implementation of the road map of the plan of action against the involvement of children in armed conflict (Cape Verde); 110.71 Continue the rapid and comprehensive implementation of the road map on the end of recruiting children by armed forced, adopted in May 2013 (France); 110.72 Implement the action plan signed with the United Nations in June 2011 to end current and prevent future recruitment and use of children in the armed forces, and adopt the draft child protection code criminalizing this under domestic law (Ireland); 110.73 Ensure that the Plan of Action signed in 2011 by the Government and the United Nations and the road map to put an end to the phenomenon of child soldiers are fully implemented (Togo); 110.74 Seek funds for the implementation of the plan of action and road map for children associated with armed groups and forces, particularly in providing reintegration assistance and education and training geared towards longer-term durable solution for them (Sierra Leone); 110.75 In line with its previous UPR commitment enact legislation to prohibit corporal punishment in all settings (Hungary); 110.76 Continue efforts to promote and protect the rights of the child and consider establishing a specialised national body for the protection of the rights of the child (Sudan); 110.77 Appoint a prison ombudsperson to deploy to local prisons to respond to prisoners’ complaints (United States of America); 110.78 Incorporate in criminal law the principle of absolute prohibition of torture and ensure that the ban is strictly enforced in conformity with the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Uruguay); 110.79 Incorporate into the national legislation the definition of torture under the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and ensure that any statement made as a result of torture will not be used as evidence in any judicial proceeding in accordance with article 15 of the said Convention (Mexico); 110.80 Re-examine the proposal to revise law 017/PR/2010 relating to the press regime in Chad in order to amend or withdraw the provisions which could infringe on freedom of expression and freedom of the press (Canada); 110.81 Continue working sufficiently to publicize the recommendations of the UPR Working Group and the plan of action (Ethiopia); 110.82 Consider adopting a comprehensive law against human trafficking and implement its National Action Plan against Trafficking (Egypt); 110.83 Adopt appropriate plans or programmes to speed up the development of the country on the basis of the five priorities that it has established (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 110.84 Complete the judiciary reform program PRAJUST, in particular the reform of the criminal code as well as the Code of Criminal Procedure, and ensure that inquiry procedures are reviewed and improved and investigation practices accelerated (Germany); 110.85 Consider incorporating the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners and the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules) into its national legislation and government policies as appropriate (Thailand); 110.86 Continue measures to ensure the smooth running of the newly established institutions and implementation of legislative acts in the field of human rights (Azerbaijan); 110.87 Ensure the implementation of the recommendations of the Fact-Finding Commission on the events which occurred in Chad from 28 January to 8 February 2008 and their consequences (Switzerland); 110.88 Follow up the implementation of the programme drawn up by the Government with the assistance of UNDP to strengthen judicial departments, human rights and gender equity (United Arab Emirates): 110.89 Continue the fruitful cooperation with United Nations mechanisms on human rights as well as the process of ratification of international instruments that Chad has not yet acceded to (Côte d’Ivoire); 110.90 Extend a standing invitation to all thematic special procedures (Montenegro); 110.91 Strengthen measures to combat more effectively all forms of discrimination and violence against women, taking into account that in this matter, customs and traditions are often the main obstacle to overcome, in order to achieve the objectives (Comoros); 110.92 Reinforce protection measures against violence and discrimination of vulnerable people, including women, children, refugees and displaced persons (Côte d’Ivoire); 110.93 Take the appropriate measures to abolish the death penalty from its criminal justice system (Spain); 110.94 Abolish the death penalty for all crimes, promote an official moratorium on executions, and commute the death sentences for imprisonment (Uruguay); 110.95 Establish a de jure moratorium on executions and take necessary measures with a view to abolishing death penalty (Switzerland); 110.96 Implement a process for the independent investigation of allegations of torture and ill-treatment by law enforcement officers and improve the ability to prosecute those found responsible (United States of America); 110.97 Continue its efforts in fighting and preventing torture, with emphasis on criminal legislation to guarantee the absolute nature of the prohibition of torture (Brazil); 110.98 Provide protection for elected officials, for members of the opposition and all persons that criticize State institutions against arbitrary detention and ensure that any cases of aggression against them are investigated (Canada); 110.99 Improve the living conditions of detainees and establish a system of independent monitoring in all detention facilities (Czech Republic); 110.100 Put an end to arbitrary detention, improve detention conditions and amend the Penal Code (France); 110.101 Better prevent episodes of abuses and violence committed by security forces on detainees and duly punish the perpetrators (Italy); 110.102 Continue the eradication of the practice of female genital mutilation (FGM) and enforce the present legislation to combat rape and other forms of violence against women, including against female refugees and internally displaced persons (Netherlands); 110.103 Take steps to fully implement and enforce laws on violence against women and to ensure that victims are able to benefit from the existing legislative framework (South Africa); 110.104 Ensure that women and girls who are victims of rape and other forms of violence benefit from the medical assistance and the psychological support that they need (Togo); 110.105 Continue to increase its efforts to prevent violence against women and girls and conduct thorough, prompt investigations into all reports of such violence, and end impunity for these crimes (Australia); 110.106 Take appropriate measures to combat all forms of violence against women (Benin); 110.107 Adopt the Penal Code and apply its provisions relating to violence against women, including female genital mutilations and other sexual violence, early and enforced marriage (Cape Verde); 110.108 Ensure that women and girls in displaced persons camps and in the general population are truly protected against all forms of violence, including early or enforced marriage and ensure that the perpetrators of crimes against women are brought to justice (Canada); 110.109 Continue commitment against all forms of violence against women, particularly sexual violence, female genital mutilations and forced marriage (France); 110.110 Enforce proper amendments to the Criminal Code in order to put it into line with the provisions enshrined, inter alia, in the Constitution of Chad and to continue reinforcing the legal framework to protect women’s rights, with the aim of effectively addressing any act of violence against women, including female genital mutilations and early and forced marriages, a practice which is sadly still too much widespread in the country (Italy); 110.111 Establish and strengthen mechanisms that provide support for victims of violence against women and girls, and ensure that they are effectively protected from all forms of violence (Maldives); 110.112 Ensure persecution of perpetrators of violence against women (Maldives); 110.113 Prioritize the implementation of the reproductive health law and provide for sanctions against the perpetrators of the crimes of female genital mutilation, early marriage and domestic and sexual violence, ensuring the investigation of the cases as well as the prosecution and punishment of the perpetrators (Uruguay); 110.114 Further continue in fighting harmful traditional practices (Ethiopia); 110.115 Effectively implement its female genital mutilation ban while giving young girls proper information about this prohibition (Czech Republic); 110.116 Carry out awareness-raising campaigns on sexual and gender-based violence, as recommended by the UNHCR, and ensure that all the reported cases receive an adequate response (Slovenia); 110.117 Launch awareness-raising campaigns to address harmful traditional practices that adversely affect the implementation of its human rights commitments (Sierra Leone); 110.118 Continue collaboration with its partners to reduce the prevalence of female genital mutilation (FGM) (South Sudan); 110.119 Take measures to prevent the criminal behaviour of its military and police units assigned in peacekeeping missions, responsible for acts of sexual violence, and enforce the respect for international and human rights law among its peacekeeping units (Czech Republic); 110.120 Make more vigorous efforts to combat violence against children and child trafficking and strengthen cooperation with the United Nations in protecting the rights of the child (China); 110.121 Take all the necessary measures to prevent recruitment and use of children, including the criminalisation of such acts (Slovenia); 110.122 Step up all sorts of measures to end the recruitment and use of children under 18, free those children currently recruited and fully cooperate with the agencies in the field in the demobilization and reintegration of child soldiers (Uruguay); 110.123 Continue working to eradicate the recruitment of children (Argentina); 110.124 Continue its effort in implementing the programme of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of child soldiers (South Sudan); 110.125 Continue efforts to end child recruitment by the national armed forces and all non-State armed groups (Australia); 110.126 Make further efforts to combat the recruitment of child soldiers to the national army and to armed groups, with the aim of criminalizing the practice in the near future (Maldives); 110.127 Redouble efforts to put in place an independent, impartial and effective administration of justice (Switzerland); 110.128 Continue to invest sufficient resources in the judicial system so that it could combat impunity (Egypt); 110.129 Establish an independent judiciary free from control of the Executive with impartial prosecutions in all cases (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 110.130 Continue its ongoing efforts in judicial reform (Azerbaijan); 110.131 Continue to address the important issues related to the judicial reform and in particular the question of the living conditions of detainees, also by continuing to implement the PRAJUST Programme, launched with the support of the European Union (Italy); 110.132 Continue its efforts to combat impunity for the serious violations of human rights that had been committed (Argentina); 110.133 Ensure birth registration without discrimination of any kind, including unregistered adults, and intensify the deployment of mobile birth registration units (Mexico); 110.134 Renew and strengthen efforts towards universalizing access to civil registry (Brazil); 110.135 Ensure birth registrations while strengthening the implementation of mobile registration units of civil status (Turkey); 110.136 Ensure the freedoms of expression and opinion are respected, including in its consideration of the draft media laws currently before Parliament (Australia); 110.137 Guarantee, respect and promote freedom of opinion and expression for all (France); 110.138 Ensure that the legislative framework guarantees the right to freedom of expression and opinion and to put an end to the intimidations which journalists are victims of (Switzerland); 110.139 Protect journalists and human rights defenders and ensure that they can operate freely and without fear of reprisal (Czech Republic); 110.140 Ensure the consistent implementation of Law n° 17 of 2010 and protect journalists from arbitrary arrests on the grounds of defamation offenses (Germany); 110.141 Reject the proposed amendment to the media law to ensure a safe operating environment for journalists (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 110.142 Facilitate the development, in law and practice, of a safe and enabling environment in which both civil society and human rights defenders can operate free from fear, hindrance and insecurity (Ireland); 110.143 Continue efforts to guarantee the safety of human rights defenders from arbitrary arrests and intimidation (Netherlands); 110.144 Take the appropriate legislative measures for the proper defence and protection of human rights defenders and investigate all threats and attacks suffered by this group to bring to justice those responsible for such acts (Spain); 110.145 Allow the inclusion of all political opposition actors in the process of National Dialogue on Development (Turkey); 110.146 Ensure the participation of socially vulnerable groups, including women, in the process of democratization and development (Turkey); 110.147 Implement the 2011 recommendations by European Union election observers concerning the equal political participation such as to increase number of women candidates to the National Assembly (Czech Republic); 110.148 Continue its positive engagement to increase women’s representation in political and public life (Rwanda); 110.149 Develop and implement action plans for employment that would reduce unemployment in the informal sector (Egypt); 110.150 Remain committed to poverty reduction, improving the living standards of people and realizing Millennium Development Goals (China); 110.151 Further strengthen human rights, particularly economic, social and cultural rights, in order to increase the quality of life of its people, with the cooperation and technical assistance needed by the country (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela); 110.152 Intensify its poverty reduction measures including through extending its entrepreneurial scheme to cover all vulnerable groups nationally (Zimbabwe); 110.153 Continue efforts to further implement the National Development Plan for the period 2013–2015 (Algeria); 110.154 Seek the support of the international community to accompany the implementation of its commitments vis-à-vis all components of society (Madagascar); 110.155 Prioritize the social sectors such as health and education in government spending and seek international cooperation to improve the livelihood of its people (Sierra Leone); 110.156 Continue efforts to combat poverty and provide basic services to vulnerable groups (Sudan); 110.157  Strengthen its efforts to combat poverty and social inequalities  (Senegal);  110.158  Continue and step up efforts already under way to make sure that  there is better access and better quality for health and education services for all citizens (Cuba); 110.159 Ensure equal access to the health care, and enhance the quality of health care services, particularly through increasing of the qualification of professionals (Armenia); 110.160 Double efforts to ensure that in 2015, Chad reaches the Millennium Development Goals, namely the attainment of quality education for all at the primary level (Comoros); 110.161 Eliminate disparities between girls and boys in the educational system (Burkina Faso); 110.162 Provide training services and professional development to all teachers (South Sudan); 110.163  Strengthen the adult  literacy  education programme (South  Sudan);  110.164  Continue the efforts towards improving the quality of education  to ensure that every child has access to primary education, as well as to promote gender equality in education (Armenia); 110.165 Continue current efforts to improve the literacy rate, particularly among women, and provide girls and boys with equal access to education (Egypt); 110.166 Allocate the necessary resources to ensure universal primary education for girls and boys alike by 2015 and accept the request from the Special Rapporteur on the right to education to visit the country (Hungary); 110.167 Intensify its efforts in promoting literacy among the population, especially among rural women (Malaysia); 110.168 Continue its efforts to build more classrooms under the Intermediate Strategy for Education and Literacy (SIPEA) programme (Malaysia); 110.169 Continue to strengthen access to education through various programmes and initiatives (Pakistan); 110.170 In cooperation with UNESCO continue to implement measures to promote access to education for all (Singapore); 110.171 Continue its efforts in favour of the education of children, especially in the rural parts of the country (Senegal); 110.172 Ensure primary education to all children and improve its quality (Romania); 110.173 Ensure the protection of persons with disabilities (Uganda); 110.174 Further improve the conditions of refugees and internally displaced persons by allowing them equal access to health and social services in a sustainable manner, and in coordination with the international community (Turkey). 111. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex 
[English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of Chad was headed by H.E. Mr. Raoul Laouna Gong, Minister of Human Rights and the Promotion of Fundamental Freedoms and composed of the following members: • Ms. 	Amina Kodjiyana, former Minister of Human Rights, Special Adviser to the Prime Ministry; • Mr. Abderamane	 Djassnambaille, Former Minister of Human Rights, Special Adviser to the Prime Minister;  • Mr. Bamanga Abbas Malloum, Ambassador and Permanent Representative to the Organization of United Nations; • Mr. Ahmat Bartchiret, General Secretary of the Minister of Human Rights and the Promotion of Fundamental Freedoms; • Mr. Mathias Daoudongar, Member of the Inter-ministerial Follow-up Committee, Representative of the Ministry of Justice; • Mr. Angui Awada, Senior Adviser at the Permanent Mission of Chad in Geneva. • Ms. Clémentine Neldengar, Member of the Inter-ministerial Follow-up Committee, Representative of the Ministry of the Human Rights and the Promotion of Fundamental Freedoms; • Mr. Isamel Adoum Hamid, Member of the Inter-ministerial Follow-up Committee, Representative of the Ministry of Social Affairs, National Solidarity and Family. 