Distr.: General 6 January 2014 Original: English/French General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-fifth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Congo * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.14-10049  (E)    170114 210114 *1410049* Contents 
Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–110 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–24 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 25–110 5 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 111–115 13  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 24 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its seventeenth session from 21 October to 1 November 2013. The review of the Congo was held at the 15th meeting on 30 October 2013. The delegation of Congo was headed by Mr. Bienvenu Okiemy, Minister of Communication and Relations with Parliament. At its 19th meeting held on 1 November 2013, the Working Group adopted the report on the Congo. 2. On 14 January 2013, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of the Congo: Austria, Ethiopia and Indonesia. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Congo: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/17/COG/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/17/COG/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/17/COG/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by the Czech Republic, Germany, Netherlands, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to the Congo through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR). I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The Minister of Communication and Relations with Parliament began his speech by expressing his commitment to universally shared human rights values. He said that the delegation had come to present to the Working Group the national report of the Congo on the implementation of the recommendations resulting from the first universal periodic review held in 2009, prepared on the basis of an inclusive process involving the Government, through an interministerial commission, as well as civil society. 6. He said that the Congo had accepted 51 recommendations during its first universal periodic review. Much attention had been accorded to their implementation but some goals had yet to be achieved. 7. He said that the second universal periodic review was taking place in a political context of greater peace and security and institutional stability that helped to strengthen participatory democracy and the rule of law. He continued by noting that, in economic terms, the country had recorded significant results which helped to improve people’s living conditions and poverty reduction. From the political and social standpoint, the Government was committed to making the Congo a place where people lived in harmony and were building a future together, without discrimination based on origin, social status or ethnicity, in compliance with the fundamental freedoms and rights of every person. 8. Concerning international human rights instruments, the Minister said that the Congo had become party to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, the Additional Protocol to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children. Furthermore, the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide and the International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention No. 169 concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries (1989) were being ratified. 9. He said that women, children, the elderly, persons with disabilities and indigenous peoples benefited from specific protection measures. He indicated that the Congo had been the first country to adopt national legislation to ensure the promotion and protection of indigenous peoples (Act No. 5 of 2011). 10. The Congo believed and adhered to multilateralism. Its relations with the United Nations were conducted in a framework of ongoing and constructive dialogue. The Minister said that since its first universal periodic review, the Congo had received visits from two mechanisms of the Human Rights Council: the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances and the Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples. 11. The Minister acknowledged that the Government was aware of the delay in the submission of reports to the various mechanisms. Arrangements had been made to deal with the delay, specifically through the establishment of an interministerial committee. 12. He recalled that the independence of the judiciary was guaranteed by article 136 of the Constitution under which the judiciary was independent of the executive and legislative powers. He added that the Government was deploying all its efforts to combat corruption in the judiciary. For example, in 2009, 11 judges had been dismissed for corruption by the Supreme Council of the Judiciary. 13. He said that torture was prohibited by the Constitution and that its perpetrators were subject to criminal penalties and disciplinary sanctions. In the Congo, a country which was still in a post-conflict situation, the police forces had been re-established by incorporating ex-combatants under disarmament, demobilization and reintegration measures and because of the country’s will to establish peace. The National Police Academy had been restructured and its training programmes included instruction on international humanitarian law and human rights. 14. The head of the Congolese delegation stated that the creation of a Ministry for the Advancement of Women and the integration of women in development was in line with women’s aspirations and expectations in the field of human rights. Gender equality was guaranteed by the Constitution and the law ensured women and men equal access to employment. Women and men with the same qualifications had equal pay. Women were involved in all decision-making bodies. 15. He said that sexual violence and female genital mutilation were prohibited by law. Although, female genital mutilation was not a cultural tradition among the Congolese, some Congolese communities made no secret of their support for the highly controversial practice. He noted that significant progress had been made in the health of mothers and girls through obstetric consultations and the fight against the mother-to-child transmission of HIV/AIDS. 16. The protection of the rights of the child was guaranteed by the 2010 Act. It ensured children full protection against violence, exploitation and sexual abuse, child labour, child trafficking, neglect and abuse. One of the Government’s main priorities was children’s access to education. Compulsory education up to the age of 16 was free of charge. 17. In recent years the authorities had paid particular attention to the fight against trafficking in persons in general and in children in particular. The Congo had also undertaken to take action at the regional level, in cooperation with certain bilateral partners. 18. The Minister said that the exercise of civil and political rights was guaranteed by the Constitution and laws. During elections those rights took on particular importance. After its first universal periodic review, the Congo had held presidential elections in 2009 and parliamentary elections in 2012. During those elections, freedom of the press and freedom of expression had been guaranteed as well as equal treatment of candidates in terms of media coverage. 19. He said that the favourable economic conditions that the Congo was experiencing had allowed for the realization of certain economic, social and cultural rights, including the payment of 21 months of wage arrears to State officials, the lifting of measures adopted in 1994 as part of structural adjustment programmes negotiated with the Bretton Woods institutions and a review of the salaries of State employees. 20. Significant progress had been made in the field of education where substantial resources had been committed to strengthening admission capacities and academic facilities in schools and universities. He said that the Congo had reached an enrolment rate of over 82 per cent and allocated 3 per cent of its GDP to education, in other words, 12 per cent of the national budget. 21. In the field of health, specific measures had been taken, inter alia, to provide free malaria and tuberculosis treatment for children from 0 to 15 years, caesarean sections in ectopic pregnancies, as well as support for people living with HIV/AIDS. Vaccination coverage was close to 90 per cent for children aged 0 to 5 years. 22. The State had invested more than 1 billion euros in electricity production, bringing the installed capacity from 89 to 607.5 megawatts. 23. He added that in view of the poor access to drinking water (45 per cent in urban areas and 14 per cent in rural areas) since 2002, the State had made considerable efforts to improve the water supply in the main cities of the country and also to build new water supply systems in smaller towns and rural areas. From 2005 to 2012, investments of more than 1 billion euros had been made. 24. The head of the delegation said that, in 2010, the national human rights commission had acquired B status from the International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights. Since 2010, the Government had started work on the construction of the headquarters of the commission so that it had appropriate working conditions. He concluded by saying that the Government intended to introduce certain reforms so that the commission would be awarded A status. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 25. During the interactive dialogue, 73 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in chapter II of the present report. 26. Libya commended the accession by the Congo to several international human rights instruments and protocols. It noted that the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) had welcomed the commitment to measures protecting stateless persons. It made recommendations. 27. Liechtenstein acknowledged the efforts by the Congo to overcome gender inequality and its commitment to international justice, but noted the concern of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women about discriminatory legal provisions, customary practices and local traditions regarding marriage, inheritance and property rights. It made recommendations. 28. Malaysia commended the progress in education, health, eradicating poverty and combating trafficking in persons, especially women and children. It noted the 25 per cent increase in the number of schools and the provision of free textbooks. It made recommendations. 29. Costa Rica applauded the ratification of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (UNTOC) and efforts to combat trafficking in persons. It noted progress in addressing illiteracy through educational initiatives and legislation on indigenous peoples, showing concern for their marginalization. It invited the Congo to introduce a moratorium on the application of death penalty. It made recommendations. 30. Mauritania noted the ongoing commitment to international cooperation and interactive dialogue on human rights. It commended policies to prohibit trafficking in children and punish perpetrators and urged compliance of the Congo with its international obligations on freedom of expression and combating persecution of journalists.  31. Mexico applauded implementation of a national action plan to improve indigenous people’s quality of life. It congratulated the Congo on ratifying UNTOC and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing it (Trafficking in Persons Protocol), and related agreements signed with Benin. It made recommendations. 32. Montenegro asked the Congo whether it had taken steps to amend the Labour Law to ensure prevention of widespread child labour and encouraged it to finalize legislative reform on gender equality and enact laws against trafficking and violence against women. It made recommendations. 33. Uruguay highlighted the peace consolidation, strengthening of participative democracy and progress in the right to health care and education. It made recommendations. 34. The Netherlands complimented the Congo on ratifying the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. It expressed concern about UPR first-cycle recommendations accepted by the Congo but not yet implemented, including the ratification of several international conventions and protocols. It made recommendations. 35. Nigeria noted the concrete steps against HIV/AIDS and successful vaccination of young children against various diseases. It commended the Congo on transforming economic growth into improved living conditions for its citizens. It made recommendations. 36. Paraguay noted that the Congo had ratified international human rights instruments, expressed concern on the Congo not having established enforced disappearance as a criminal offence, and noted legislation on the promotion and protection of indigenous peoples and children’s rights. It made recommendations. 37. The Philippines welcomed accession to the Optional Protocol of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) and the Trafficking in Persons Protocol. It commended efforts to strengthen the national human rights commission and to empower women, as well as its development of a national policy and long-term action plan on gender. It made recommendations. 38. The Russian Federation noted with satisfaction the progress made by the Congo in the promotion and protection of human rights since the UPR first cycle. It made recommendations. 39. Rwanda commended the enhanced legislative and institutional framework for the promotion and protection of human rights. It applauded the adoption of legislation against female genital mutilation (FGM) and measures to address trafficking in persons, especially women and children. It made recommendations. 40. Senegal welcomed measures to eradicate FGM and encouraged the Congo to conduct awareness campaigns against sexual violence. It noted that the implementation of measures to promote and protect human rights, especially in relation to health and education. It made recommendations. 41. Sierra Leone noted that the Congo had implemented legislative and institutional reforms, including adopting the 2011 Indigenous People’s Promotion Act and related national action plan and measures to combat trafficking in persons. It made recommendations. 42. Singapore noted efforts to promote gender equality and empower women and continue cooperation with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) in enhancing children’s rights to education. It also noted public health improvements, including in the provision of vaccinations and obstetric care. It made recommendations. 43. Slovakia welcomed the Congo strengthening children’s rights through accession to the Optional Protocol of CRC, and encouraged the Government in the full implementation of CRC. It was concerned by educational restrictions faced by girls and women and their lower literacy rate. It encouraged it to extend a standing invitation to all special procedures. It made a recommendation. 44. Slovenia welcomed efforts to improve access to health services and ratification of both Optional Protocols to CRC. It noted with concern that every fifth childbirth remained unregistered, affecting fundamental rights such as education and health. It made recommendations. 45. South Africa noted positive steps in children’s rights in the areas of health, education, protection from trafficking, violence and exploitation, and productive relationships with international organizations, including UNICEF. It welcomed the work in fighting the HIV/AIDS pandemic. It made recommendations. 46. South Sudan noted the measures against trafficking in persons and welcomed ratification of UNTOC and the Trafficking in Persons Protocol thereto. It appreciated achievements in the area of health, especially in maternity care and obstetrics. It made recommendations. 47. Spain congratulated the Government of the Congo on its progress in human rights, including ratification of UNTOC and the Trafficking in Persons Protocol. It made recommendations. 48. Sri Lanka welcomed the accession to the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict (OP-CRC-AC), and on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (OP-CRC-SC) and UNTOC. It commended its efforts to promote access to health care, including legislation and regulations to combat HIV/AIDS, and education for all children. It made recommendations. 49. The Sudan commended the Congo on implementing the first-cycle UPR recommendations and its accession to a number of human rights instruments. It noted measures to promote economic, social and cultural rights and the commitment to protecting children’s rights. It made recommendations. 50. Sweden asked for details of actual or potential measures to ensure full awareness of minority and indigenous groups’ rights and how the Government intended to increase investigations, prosecutions and sentences for sexual violence. It made recommendations. 51. Thailand commended initiatives to improve prison conditions, especially for female prisoners. It noted the expansion of vaccination coverage and provision of free health care for mothers, babies and children. Thailand welcomed ratification of the Optional Protocols to CRC. It made recommendations. 52. Gabon welcomed progress made in protecting human rights, particularly improvements to the legislative framework. It noted steps taken to combat trafficking in persons involving children and women and welcomed gender equality measures. Gabon made recommendations. 53. Tunisia encouraged the Congo to continue combating all forms of discrimination and violence towards women. It called on OHCHR and the international community to respond favourably to requests for technical assistance. It made recommendations. 54. Uganda commended the Congo on its continued engagement with United Nations agencies and its efforts to combat poverty, consolidate peace and democracy, improve health care and education, including infrastructure and materials. It made recommendations. 55. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was concerned that commitments on abolishing the death penalty remained unfulfilled, and about violence against women and children. It urged ratification of international instruments and strengthened legislation on discrimination against women. It made recommendations. 56. The United States of America called upon the Congo to reduce the length of pretrial detention, increase judicial independence and end arbitrary arrests. It was concerned about discrimination and violence against women and girls. It made recommendations. 57. Morocco commended the methodical preparation of the UPR report of the Congo. It encouraged the Government to continue efforts to fill any remaining gaps in judicial administration, prison administration, governance and health-care provision. Morocco made a recommendation. 58. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela noted accession to key international human rights instruments. It noted the impact of economic growth on reduction of poverty and improvements in health care, including 90 per cent vaccination coverage for children up to 5 years old and the establishment of gratuity in education. It made a recommendation. 59. Viet Nam noted excellent progress in consolidating peace and democracy and the economy. It welcomed efforts in promoting gender equality, the elimination of violence, protecting children against violence, child labour and trafficking in persons. It made a recommendation. 60. Zimbabwe noted the adoption of growth, employment and poverty-reduction programmes and measures to improve human rights such as free malaria and tuberculosis treatment for children aged less than 15 years and the abolition of examination fees. It made recommendations. 61. Algeria noted legislative and institutional measures to promote and protect human rights, strengthen democracy and peace consolidation and develop the economy. It welcomed efforts to promote economic, cultural and social rights. It made recommendations. 62. Angola welcomed efforts to promote and protect human rights and accede to more international human rights instruments. It praised the economic success of the Congo, which had led to better living conditions and free health care and education for all. It made recommendations. 63. Argentina commended the ratification of the OP-CRC-AC and legislation enacted to protect the rights of persons living with HIV/AIDS. It encouraged the Congo to continue its efforts to address enforced disappearances and amend legislation considered discriminatory towards women. Argentina made recommendations. 64. Thanking the speakers, the head of the Congolese delegation noted the pertinence of Member States’ comments reflecting the international community’s desire to be governed by the rule of law. He said that, having emerged from civil wars, the Congo had recognized the rule of law as the basis of Congolese society. 65. The Government ensured that the domestic legal order was in keeping with international standards, with a view to the consolidation of democracy in the Congo. It was against that background that the delegation would respond to questions during the interactive dialogue 66. He said that the prohibition of torture in the Congo was enshrined in the Constitution. He added that the Constitution did not yet contain an explicit classification of torture. Acts of torture were punished under conventional criminal offences against individuals. 67. Concerning detention conditions, the delegation noted that prisons built during the colonial era were designed to accommodate a small number of inmates. However, the Government had embarked on an extensive programme of rehabilitation and construction of prison facilities. 68. He said that prisons were visited by non-governmental organizations for human rights, the investigation and analysis services of the Directorate General of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, the national human rights commission and international institutions that so requested. 69. Concerning the ratification of international legal instruments, he said that the process of ratifying the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance had commenced. Ratification had been approved on first reading in the Senate. The adoption process was under way in the National Assembly. Both Houses of Parliament had adopted the draft law on ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol. The law would be enacted before 2014. Similarly, the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment and the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights was being considered. 70. The Minister said that the Congo had not applied the death penalty since 1982. As such, the country was considered to be de facto abolitionist. The question of the legal abolition of the death penalty was under consideration, taking into account change in attitude towards the matter. 71. On corruption, the Minister referred to a number of measures carried out between 2012 and 2013 by the national commission to combat corruption, fraud and bribery, including the hearing of 311 companies awarded public works contracts, and to the establishment of a platform with civil society to create an early warning system. 72. With regard to women’s rights, since 2009 the Congo had a national gender policy which placed particular emphasis on the representation of women in decision-making. The electoral law imposed quotas on the representation of women in the electoral lists of political parties, failing which they were rejected. Those quotas were 15 per cent for the parliamentary elections and 20 per cent in local elections. A centre to promote women in politics had also been created. 73. Combating sexual violence was a government concern. To that end, two draft laws had been drafted: one on gender violence, accompanied by an action plan for 2013–2017; another one on the definition and punishment of sexual harassment. The head of the Congolese delegation indicated that the two draft laws complemented existing provisions in the Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure. 74. Armenia noted steps taken to protect children, including the adoption of legislation prohibiting child labour, the recruitment of child soldiers or the trafficking or sale of children. It encouraged efforts to ensure women’s equal rights to property ownership, employment and political life. It made recommendations. 75. Australia acknowledged efforts to improve the national human rights framework. It acknowledged a moratorium on the use of the death penalty and commended efforts to provide safe drinking water and ensure access to education for all children. It made recommendations. 76. Bangladesh noted that challenges such as high infant, child and maternal mortality rates, low women’s participation and the high prevalence of HIV/AIDS, still needed to be addressed. It called on the international community to provide the necessary support to the Congo. It made recommendations. 77. Belgium noted that women continued to suffer from all forms of discrimination and violence. It also noted that, despite a de facto moratorium on the death penalty, its 2009 commitments had yet to be implemented. It made recommendations. 78. Benin expressed appreciation for the adoption of legislation to promote and protect the rights of indigenous peoples, children and persons living with HIV/AIDS, as well to prohibit the trafficking and sexual exploitation of indigenous women and children. It made recommendations. 79. Botswana welcomed legislative reforms in the area of human rights, especially concerning the rights of children, persons living with HIV/AIDS and indigenous women and children. It encouraged further steps towards reviewing legislation on its national human rights commission. It made recommendations. 80. Brazil noted the adoption of legislation and action plans on gender, children’s rights and health. However, it remained concerned about women’s rights, the disproportionately high number of women with HIV/AIDS and women’s lack of awareness of their rights. Brazil made recommendations. 81. Burkina Faso welcomed the strengthening of the national human rights commission and commended progress made in education and reducing maternal and infant mortality. It encouraged further efforts in that regard. It welcomed the prohibition on FGM. Burkina Faso made recommendations. 82. Burundi noted measures adopted to improve prison conditions, combat corruption and give priority to education. It commended adoption of legislation to combat HIV/AIDS and protect persons living with HIV. It made a recommendation. 83. Cambodia noted endeavours to enhance development, increase growth and employment and reduce poverty. It commended ratification of key international human rights instruments, particularly those addressing trafficking in persons and protecting children’s rights, including OP-CRC-AC. It made recommendations. 84. Canada asked what measures had been adopted to combat the spread of HIV, in line with its 2009 recommendations. It welcomed the significant fall in maternal mortality rates since 2005, thanks to the provision of free caesareans. It made recommendations. 85. Cabo Verde stressed the importance of the Congo ratifying international human rights instruments that it had already signed and of their incorporation into domestic legislation. It encouraged international partners to respond to requests for support. It made a recommendation. 86. Central African Republic noted ratification of OP-CRC-SC, OP-CRC-AC and the Trafficking in Persons Protocol to UNTOC. It encouraged the Congo to continue reforms to improve living conditions for the Congolese people. It called upon the international community to support the Congo in its efforts. 87. Chad commended the “matrix for the implementation of the recommendations of the UPR of the Congo” framework document. It welcomed efforts to protect the rights of women, children and indigenous peoples. It called upon the international community to support the Congo. 88. Chile commended ratification of important international instruments, as well as legislative and institutional reforms, which had led to laws to improve enjoyment of civil and political rights. It made recommendations. 89. China noted increased economic growth and democracy; and efforts to improve employment opportunities, medical services and free education. It welcomed laws to protect the rights of children and indigenous peoples. It called upon the international community to provide financial and technical assistance. It made recommendations. 90. Maldives encouraged enactment of core human rights instruments in domestic law. It expressed concern over the level of gender-based violence and discrimination. Noting widespread use of torture, it encouraged adoption of a related law and definition. It made recommendations. 91. Côte d’Ivoire noted structural reforms, strengthened legal framework and good governance, which would have a positive impact on health, education, growth, employment, reducing poverty and fighting corruption. It made recommendations. 92. Cuba noted efforts to guarantee the right to education and non-discrimination; and welcomed initiatives to improve access to drinking water, reduce infectious diseases, eliminate all forms of discrimination against women, and the investment in women’s and children’s health. It made recommendations. 93. The Democratic Republic of the Congo took note of economic growth, slightly improved living conditions and other impacts from human rights programmes. It welcomed strengthened normative framework and laws to protect women and children. It made recommendations. 94. Djibouti noted provisions to protect vulnerable groups, and commended the strengthened five-year development plan to fight poverty. It invited the international community to provide financial and technical assistance to help expand the national human rights policy. It made recommendations. 95. Ecuador noted the design of a poverty reduction strategy and progress in consolidating peace, strengthening the State and improving public health, especially regarding immunizations and the diagnosis and treatment of persons with HIV. It made recommendations. 96. Egypt commended the implementation of existing legislation and programmes. It noted widespread structural reforms and improved governance, and urged the Congo to consolidate peace and stimulate development. It acknowledged challenges facing the Congo. It made recommendations. 97. Estonia urged implementation of Act No. 5-2011 on the promotion and protection of indigenous peoples. It called for a law on violence against women, and encouraged sexual and reproductive health education and access to health care. It encouraged abolition of the death penalty. It made recommendations. 98. Ethiopian noted the implementation of recommendations accepted during the first UPR cycle, welcomed development of the judicial system and encouraged efforts to improve capacity of judges and lawyers. It made a recommendation. 99. France welcomed efforts by the Congo since the first UPR cycle. It commended the ratification of OP-CRC-AC. It made recommendations. 100. Togo commended the strengthened national legislative framework of the Congo and its accession to most human rights conventions. It noted measures to guarantee free school education but raised concern over high school-dropout rates. It made recommendations. 101. Germany commended progress in combating corruption and strengthened children’s rights. It expressed concern over violations of detainees’ human rights and asked what measures had been taken to ensure due process for accused persons and detainees. It made recommendations. 102. Hungary regretted use of the death penalty for certain crimes. It expressed concerns over discriminatory legal provisions and violence against women. It requested information on the mandate of the Observatory for Violence Control, and inquired about the forms of violence it addressed. It made recommendations. 103. Indonesia appreciated efforts to promote and protect human rights, commended measures to invest and build supply networks for safe drinking water in towns and rural areas. It made recommendations. 104. Ireland commended Act No. 5-2011 on the promotion and protection of indigenous people. It noted that the right to seek asylum was enshrined in the Constitution. While efforts had been made, women still faced challenges to enjoying their rights. It made recommendations. 105. Italy encouraged further efforts to improve birth registration and legislation of indigenous peoples. It encouraged a moratorium on capital punishment. It expressed concern over violence and discriminatory practices against women, particularly refugees. It requested information on initiatives to address discriminatory legal provisions and harmful traditional practices. It made recommendations.  106. Kenya noted the continuation of free primary education and the “B” status attained by the national human rights institution of the Congo. It acknowledged accession to the Optional Protocol of CRC, and new legislation to enhance the rights of women and children. It made a recommendation. 107. Lesotho commended progress in socioeconomic, civil and political rights, and noted challenges remaining, particularly in education, health and employment. It called upon the international community to provide technical and financial assistance to the Congo. It made a recommendation. 108. Romania acknowledged the progress in human rights in the Congo and the adoption of relevant legislation aiming to eliminate discrimination against women and to protect the rights of children. Such efforts should continue. It made recommendations. 109. In conclusion, the head of the delegation of the Congo said that the national human rights commission was paid due attention by the Government. It wanted the commission to be more in line with the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (Paris Principles). 110. Thanking all delegations for their comments and recommendations, he said that the universal periodic review had demonstrated its usefulness and that the Congo would consider seriously the recommendations emanating from it. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations** 111. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue/listed below have been examined by the Congo and enjoy the support of Congo: 111.1 Continue ratifying the rest of the conventions relative to human rights that it has not ratified (Libya); 111.2 Ratify the human rights instruments to which it is not yet a party (Togo); 111.3 Continue its efforts for the ratification of the international legal instruments to which it is not yet a party (Benin); 111.4 Continue to ratify relevant international conventions (Uganda); 111.5 Ratify the international human rights instruments that have been signed but not yet ratified, particularly the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the Optional Protocol of the Convention Against Torture and the Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Costa Rica); 111.6 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and proceed with the corresponding legal reforms in compliance with said Convention (Uruguay); 111.7 Ratify the optional protocol to CAT which it signed in 2008 (Maldives); 111.8 Abolish by law the death penalty and proceed to the ratification of the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Uruguay); 111.9 Abolish now the death penalty for all crimes and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Australia); 111.10 Abolish legally the death penalty and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (France); 111.11 Legally abolish the death penalty for all offenses and accede to the Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR (Germany); 111.12 Ratify the second optional protocol to ICCPR and abolish the death penalty for all crimes (Hungary); 111.13 Declare immediately a moratorium on the application of death penalty and initiate the constitutional and legislative reforms leading to their total abolition (Spain); 111.14 Abolish the death penalty or establish a de jure moratorium on the application of the death penalty (Belgium); 111.15 Take into consideration the possibility to amend its criminal code in order to abolish the death penalty (Italy); 111.16 Become a party to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Montenegro); 111.17 Consider ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Rwanda); 111.18 Ratify the second Optional Protocol to the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights on the abolition of the death penalty (Djibouti, Estonia); 111.19 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All persons from Enforced Disappearance (Uruguay); 111.20 Take complementary protection measures for victims and witnesses of torture and enforced disappearances, and strengthen the procedures of criminal complaints and sanctions against the perpetrators (Uruguay); 111.21 Proceed on the commitment to ratify the following protocols: the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, the Optional Protocol to the convention against torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Netherlands); 111.22 Speed up the procedure under way for accession to the convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Armenia, Rwanda); 111.23 Finalize the procedure of accession to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide and the Convention 169 concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 111.24 Complete its normative framework by the ratification of the instruments already signed, in particular the CPED, CRPD (Tunisia); 111.25 Speed up the process of integration of the provisions of the Rome Statute in its national legislation (Tunisia); 111.26 Step up its efforts geared at completing its accession to CEDAW-OP (Brazil); 111.27 Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and their families, the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Third Additional Protocol to the Geneva Conventions of 1949, the Conventions on statelessness, and ILO Convention 169 (Ecuador); 111.28 Proceed to the ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons against Enforced Disappearance and the Convention on the Rights of persons with disabilities, and ensure the transposition into national law of the ratified treaties (France); 111.29 Continue to strengthen the national legislative framework in favour of the most vulnerable groups such as women, children, and disabled (Cambodia); 111.30 Enact legislation establishing a clear definition of discrimination against women (United States of America); 111.31 Ensure the implementation of the legislation aimed at ensuring gender equality between men and women (Romania); 111.32 Speed up the review of all legislative codes, so as to bring them into conformity with ratified international instruments, particularly taking the necessary actions to include in national legislation discrimination and violence against women and eliminate existing discrimination regarding the right to property, community property and land inheritance (Paraguay); 111.33 Adopt legal measures to eliminate all forms of discrimination against women and girls, including legislation concerning the right of ownership, sharing and inheritance of land for women (Maldives); 111.34 Carry out the legislative reform to ensure de jure and de facto equality between men and women and adopt a comprehensive law repressing all forms of violence against women (Tunisia); 111.35 Step up its efforts to align its domestic legal framework with international and regional human rights conventions to which it is a party (Philippines); 111.36 Develop its normative basis in the area of the protection of fundamental rights and freedoms (Russian Federation); 111.37 Complete the review of legislative codes on preventing and punishing torture by 2014 (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 111.38 Enact legislation allowing human rights NGOs to monitor and visit detention centres (United States of America); 111.39 Intensify efforts to strengthen the national system for the promotion and protection of human rights (Nigeria); 111.40 Take additional measures so that the National Human Rights Commission complies with the Paris Principles, gets adequate resources, is composed of independent members, and has a broad human rights mandate and a specific mandate on gender equality (Uruguay); 111.41 Review the status and functioning of its national human rights institution in order to bring it in line with the Paris Principles (Tunisia); 111.42 Take steps to bring the National Human Rights Commission in line with the Paris Principles (Nigeria); 111.43 Strengthen the capacities of the National Commission on Human Rights and make it in conformity with the Paris Principles (Gabon); 111.44 Continue to strengthen the National Human Rights Commission to make it fully compliant with the Paris principles (Philippines); 111.45 Continue the process to ensure the compliance of the National Commission on Human Rights with the Paris Principles (Burkina Faso); 111.46 Further evaluate the status of the national human rights institution to bring it into full compliance with the Paris Principles, category A status (Kenya); 111.47 Allocate adequate budget to fully implement its plan of action for the protection and promotion of the rights of women (Philippines); 111.48 Continue its current efforts to reinforce the mandate and capacities of the National Human Rights Commission and the anti-corruption commission, particularly in the field of promotion and protection of women’s rights (Egypt); 111.49 Provide adequate budget to existing human rights promotion programs and strengthen their practical application (Spain); 111.50 Continue to execute its policies and commitments regarding the human rights issues (Libya); 111.51 Continue to collaborate with international organisations to promote and protect economic, social and cultural rights by all (South Africa); 111.52 Continue to take stronger efforts and measures to improve women’s status and promote gender equality (China); 111.53 Increase women’s participation in political and public life (Rwanda); 111.54 Increase the representation of women at the decision-making bodies (Burundi); 111.55 Increase its efforts to ensure the full realisation of women’s civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights by establishing national programmes to empower women’s organisations and groups through the provision of technical and financial support and microcredit (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 111.56 Continue its efforts to ensure equality for women with the assistance from the international community (Bangladesh); 111.57 Continue to promote the rights of women, with a focus on obtaining demonstrable results as regards, in particular, access to health services and to the labour market (Brazil); 111.58 Continue its efforts to achieve equal access for women to the labour market, particularly thoroughly trough vocational training programmes (Egypt); 111.59 Continue efforts in the promotion and protection of child rights, and look into forming a national institution for the protection of child rights (Sudan); 111.60 Ensure integration of human rights culture to law enforcement entities (South Sudan); 111.61 Extend its human rights awareness programme to all sections of the population (Zimbabwe); 111.62 Incorporate a module on human rights during the training of gendarmes and policemen (Djibouti); 111.63 Step up efforts and establish a capacity building programme to encourage women’s participation in decision-making positions (Thailand); 111.64 Continue to promote its successful social policies in favour of its people, with special attention to the most vulnerable sectors (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 111.65 Step up its efforts with effective measures for the promotion of the rights of vulnerable groups, especially through education and health (Viet Nam); 111.66 Seek support from the international community in its on-going efforts for the promotion of human rights and development (Benin); 111.67 Define its priorities and needs for technical assistance, strengthening its capacities and improving the infrastructures (Morocco); 111.68 Continue to strengthen measures in the fight against corruption, extortion and fraud (Botswana); 111.69 Continue to ensure better protection of the rights of all citizens through the implementation of the national action plans recently adopted, in particular those relating the strengthening of the strategic framework for combating poverty (Cambodia); 111.70 Further build the necessary capacity for the relevant stakeholders, including government agencies, national human rights institutions and legislative as well as judicative branches, through inter alia, international cooperation on technical and capacity building programmes (Indonesia); 111.71 Intensify its efforts towards capacity building and training in human rights for the justice and police personnel, as well as towards their incorporation into the schools’ curricula (Chile); 111.72 Continue its reform process in various systems including prisons, protection of women and children, and health (Indonesia); 111.73 Catch up its delay in the preparation of its initial and periodic reports to be submitted to the various Treaty Bodies (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 111.74 Submit overdue reports to The Human Rights Committee, Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, Committee Against Torture and Committee on Economic Social and Cultural Rights (Sierra Leone); 111.75 Submit its human rights reports regularly and within a reasonable time frame, to respective Treaty Bodies and in particular the outstanding report on the implementation of the Convention against Torture (Germany); 111.76 Submit its initial report on the implementation of the Convention against Torture (Togo); 111.77 Continue the fruitful cooperation with the UN human rights mechanisms and the process of ratification of the international instruments to which Congo is not yet a party (Côte d’Ivoire); 111.78 Continue its efforts to combat all forms of discrimination (Uganda); 111.79 Continue its efforts to strengthen the fight against the discriminations to which women are victims (Algeria); 111.80 Continue, with support from relevant international organisations, its effort to promote gender equality and the well-being of women and girls (Singapore); 111.81 Strengthen the implementation of measures and provisions to eradicate all forms of discrimination and sexual violence against women and girls, including the development of programs of dissemination, prevention and assistance (Chile); 111.82 Continue taking the measures that allow the total elimination of all forms of discrimination against women and ensure gender equality (Cuba); 111.83 Combat gender-based discrimination and implement the UN Security Council resolution 1325 and related resolutions on women, peace and security (Estonia); 111.84 Review and repeal all legal provisions which discriminate against women, especially provisions in the Family Code, Penal Code and tax law, with a view to achieving de jure equality (Liechtenstein); 111.85 Ensure gender equality in inheritance matters, as well as the protection of women against harmful traditional practices (Côte d’Ivoire); 111.86 Continue its efforts to ensure equality between men and women regarding inheritance and property rights (Angola); 111.87 Accelerate the review and subsequent reform of the Family Code so as to eliminate all remaining discriminatory provisions (Spain); 111.88 Prioritize, with support from the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the international community, the legislative reform to harmonize the national legislation with CEDAW, abrogate the discriminatory provisions in the Family Code, Penal Code and tax legislation in order to achieve legal equality and allow real equality for women, while adopting a general law on violence against women (Uruguay); 111.89 Step up its efforts to end discriminatory traditional practices by organising large-scale awareness-raising campaigns on women’s rights, which target local and religious leaders as well as the population in general (Liechtenstein); 111.90 Launch a national campaign to combat all forms of marginalisation or discrimination based on gender, religion or ethnicity (Sierra Leone); 111.91 Initiate investigations as soon as possible to determine responsibilities in cases of allegations of abuse and torture by Congolese security forces — especially in prisons — and prosecute the perpetrators of such crimes (Canada); 111.92 Make further efforts to establish a national mechanism to prevent and prohibit the use of torture (Maldives); 111.93 Continue its efforts in finalising the bill to combat trafficking in persons and to provide appropriate funding and resources on programmes and activities in this regard (Malaysia); 111.94 Develop awareness campaigns directed towards adults and children containing preventive measures to avert trafficking in persons (Mexico); 111.95 Continue its efforts to combat and prevent discrimination and acts of violence against women (Argentina); 111.96 Continue strengthening measures aimed at addressing issues of domestic violence and female genital mutilation, including raising awareness campaigns, ensuring effective access to justice for victims, and developing a comprehensive support system for gender-based violence victims (Botswana); 111.97 Remain steadfast in pursuing its impressive policies towards gender equality, particularly by strengthening measures to eradicate gender-based violence (Lesotho); 111.98 Design and implement an action plan to address gender based violence including domestic violence and sexual harassment (Sierra Leone); 111.99 Develop and implement, in collaboration with civil society, a comprehensive national strategy against gender-based violence, including domestic violence, sexual harassment and harmful traditional practices, including female genital mutilation (Ireland); 111.100 Take the necessary steps to eradicate domestic and sexual violence against women, especially minor women, whose numbers continue being significantly high. In this, sense, it is necessary to monitor the prevalence of cases of sexual violence in the framework of armed conflicts in order to achieve two goals: reduce the number of victims and provide victims with adequate sanitary and psychological attention. (Ecuador); 111.101 Amend and review all legislative provisions which constitute a de facto discrimination against women and establish a timeline for the adoption of a comprehensive strategy to combat sexual violence including female genital mutilation (Hungary); 111.102 Take steps to investigate sexual violations against women and adopt measures to prevent the repetition of acts against civilians by any of the groups in conflict, in compliance to international humanitarian law (Mexico); 111.103 Create a system, to include training for law enforcement, legal professionals and health care personnel, for providing legal and medical aid to survivors of gender based violence, including rape and sexual violence, domestic violence, and female genital mutilation (United States of America); 111.104 Improve the implementation of national legislation on sexual violence and ensure that perpetrators are brought to justice (Sweden); 111.105 Define enforced disappearance as a criminal offence in the Penal Code (Paraguay); 111.106 Establish a National Mechanism for the Prevention of Torture (Paraguay); 111.107 Abolish death penalty (Paraguay); 111.108 Take steps to improve prison conditions, including overcrowding and the lack of social rehabilitation measures (Sierra Leone); 111.109 Continue its efforts to improve the conditions of detention (France); 111.110 Take concrete measures such as the establishment of a computerized database on prisoners, to improve the functioning of prisons and the conditions of detainees (Canada); 111.111 Strengthen the independence of the judiciary (Nigeria); 111.112 Continue strengthening the judicial system to ensure its independence (Chile); 111.113 Ensure an independent and equitable justice for all (France); 111.114 Strengthen the powers of the inspection of the jurisdictions and the services of the High Council of the Judiciary (Djibouti); 111.115 Strengthen the capacities of the judiciary institutions (Gabon); 111.116 Take the necessary measures to put an end to impunity in all cases of violence against women (Belgium); 111.117 Further efforts to be made to make birth registration available to all groups of the population (Slovenia); 111.118 Improve the procedures to increase the percentage of children registered at birth in remote and rural areas (Djibouti); 111.119 Ensure the implementation of a free birth registration system, exempted from corruption, for all children without discrimination, throughout all the territory of the country (Romania); 111.120 Strengthen measures to reduce unemployment and underemployment of youth (Sri Lanka); 111.121 Continue its efforts to further improve the standards of living of its population, including by improving access to education and health services (Cuba); 111.122 Pay attention to the needs of persons living in rural areas, especially women, to ensure that they have access to medical and sanitary services, education and income generating projects (Costa Rica); 111.123 Continue to strengthen actions to improve access to drinking water, especially in rural areas (Senegal); 111.124 Continue efforts of poverty reduction and granting basic needs and services for the vulnerable groups of the society (Sudan); 111.125 Intensify its on-going efforts towards improving the living conditions of its people, especially the most vulnerable groups (Zimbabwe); 111.126 Establish food self-sufficiency projects aimed at vulnerable groups and develop technical education to allow access of young people to the labour market (Mexico); 111.127 Continue its efforts to implement the plan on employment growth and poverty reduction (DSCERP) 2012–2016 (Angola); 111.128 Continue implementing programs on growth employment and poverty reduction for 2012–2016, promote economic and social development, and promote and protect better all the rights of its people (China); 111.129 Continue to combat poverty with the assistance from international community (Bangladesh); 111.130 Review corruption in the healthcare system and implement measures to ensure that all persons have access to adequate healthcare without discrimination (Germany); 111.131 Continue in its endeavour to tackle child mortality and morbidity in the country (Ethiopia); 111.132 Continue to work towards reducing the occurrence of water-borne diseases such as cholera, and other infectious diseases (Australia); 111.133 Provide medical and psychological assistance to women who were victims of sexual violations during the conflicts (Mexico); 111.134 Continue, with support of the WHO and UNDP, its effort to improve access to health care by its people (Singapore); 111.135 Continue implementing programs, in cooperation with specialised organisations of the UN system, aimed at improving living conditions of migrants and providing them with possibilities for repatriation (Russian Federation); 111.136 Prioritise the completion of a comprehensive asylum and refugee law that makes provision, inter alia, for the strengthening of the capacity of the National Refugee Assistance Committee to ensure it operates effectively in handling its mandate (Sierra Leone); 111.137 Finalise, within a clear time frame, a comprehensive national legislative framework for the determination of refugee status (Ireland); 111.138 Take concrete and effective measures — such as the establishment of investigations and judicial prosecutions, as well as training in human rights — to punish and prevent abuses, in particular sexual violence, committed against refugees in the camps (Canada); 111.139 Intensify its efforts to prevent incidents of sexual and gender-based violence within refugee communities and convict the perpetrators of such crimes (Italy). 112. The following recommendations enjoy the support of the Congo which considers that they are already implemented or in the process of implementation: 112.1 Ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Nigeria, Paraguay); 112.2 Continue its efforts and carry out education, information and awareness-raising activities aimed at an effective fight against female genital mutilations (Burkina Faso); 112.3 Adopt legislation prohibiting female genital mutilation, in addition to the provisions under Act No. 4/2010 (Paraguay); 112.4 Develop a national strategy to eliminate all discriminatory practices against women, conduct awareness campaigns to eliminate inequality and abolish the practice of female genital mutilation, and ensure access to education for all women and girls (France); 112.5 Put into effect a more comprehensive approach to protect women and girls from any form of violence, especially by increasing measures aimed at preventing abuses and assisting victims (Italy); 112.6 Continue to prioritize policies aimed at enhancing the access of all children to education (South Africa); 112.7 Continue its efforts to widen the access to education for all primary and secondary children including through allocation of more resources in the area of education (Malaysia); 112.8 Ensure that both boys and girls have equal access to education (Armenia); 112.9 Adopt necessary practical measures to ensure equal access of girls to education at all levels and step up efforts to decrease illiteracy rate of women (Slovakia); 112.10 Continue efforts to promote the enrolment of girls in all levels of education (Sri Lanka); 112.11 Guarantee the right to education of girls through public awareness campaigns aimed at the families and the population in general (Togo); 112.12 Continue to take measures to ensure access to quality education and, in particular, to encourage women and girls to remain in education (Australia); 112.13 Pursue efforts to provide educational opportunities for girls and boys with disabilities and strengthen adult literacy programmes, especially for women in rural areas (Egypt); 112.14 Keep pursuing its efforts to promote and facilitate school enrolment and attendance, especially among children from poor families (Egypt); 112.15 Pursue its efforts to promote and facilitate schooling and attendance, especially for disadvantaged families (Togo); 112.16 Build new schools in the hinterland of the country (Algeria); 112.17 Continue the efforts towards improving the human rights conditions in Congo, especially through integrating human rights into the educational system in order to raise the awareness about human rights (Armenia); 112.18 Continue its policy of integrating human rights in the Congolese education system (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 112.19 Ensure the protection of and respect for persons with disabilities (Uganda); 112.20 Continue adopting measures to guarantee the rights of persons with disabilities (Argentina); 112.21 That the action initiated in favour of the rights and quality of life of indigenous peoples, comprising the Action Plan 2009–2013, the adoption of the Law of 2011 and the forthcoming publication of the corresponding implementing decree, be pursued through the formulation and implementation of a new and even more efficient multi-year plan (Cabo Verde); 112.22 Take additional steps for civic education and promote human rights awareness and ensure access to justice for indigenous groups (Sweden). 113. The following recommendations will be examined by the Congo which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-fifth session of the Human Rights Council in March 2014: 113.1 Ratify the Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute, if possible with a view to contributing to the activation of the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court over the crime of aggression at the beginning of 2017 (Liechtenstein); 113.2 Ratify the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the ICC (APIC) (Estonia); 113.3 Consider becoming a party to the Optional Protocol to the CRC on a communications procedure (Thailand); 113.4 Fully implement all obligations under the Rome Statute in its national legislation, including by incorporating provisions to cooperate promptly and fully with the ICC, and to investigate and prosecute genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes effectively before its national courts (Netherlands); 113.5 Extend a standing invitation to all thematic special procedures (Montenegro); 113.6 Consider issuing a standing invitation to the special procedures (Slovenia); 113.7 Extend a standing invitation for all mandate holders (Hungary). 114. Congo considers that the recommendations below cannot be accepted: 114.1 Guarantee equal rights for all citizens, and fight against all forms of discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity (France); 114.2 Eliminate from its legislation all forms of sexual discrimination, and take all the necessary measures to effectively enforce this (Belgium); 114.3 Increase rate of women participation in decision-making in the legislative organ to 25% (South Sudan). 115. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. Annex 
[French only] Composition of the delegation La délégation du Congo a été présidé par Monsieur Bienvenu OKIEMY, Ministre de la Communication et des Relations avec le Parlement, Porte-parole du Gouvernement, et conformé par: • Madame	 Catherine EMBONDZA, née LIPITI, Ministre de la Promotion de la Femme et de l’Intégration de la Femme au Développement; • Son	 Excellence Monsieur Luc-Joseph OKIO, Ambassadeur, Représentant Permanent de la République du Congo auprès de l’Office des Nations Unies à Genève et des autres Organisations Internationales en Suisse; • Monsieur Charles Emile APESSE, Premier Président de la Cour des Comptes et de discipline budgétaire; • Monsieur 	Laurent TENGO, Conseiller Juridique, Administratif et à la décentralisation du Président de la République; • Monsieur Alphonse Dinard MOUBANGAT MOUKONZI, Directeur de Cabinet du Ministre de la Justice et des Droits Humains; • Monsieur	 Philippe ONGAGNA, Directeur Général des Droits Humains et des Libertés Fondamentales; • Monsieur Jean Clotaire TOMBY, Directeur Général des Affaires Sociales; • Monsieur Nicolas LABARRE, Directeur Général de l’Hydraulique; • Madame Yvette Lucie LEBONDZO MBONGO PASSI, Directrice Générale de la promotion de la femme; • Monsieur Alexis Dokékias ELIRA, Directeur Général de la santé; • Monsieur Josias ITOUA YOCKA, Directeur Général du travail; • Monsieur	 Joseph KOSSA, Membre de la Commission Nationale des Droits de l’Homme; • Monsieur	 Rubain ADOUKI, Chef de Département des Services Généraux au Ministère des Affaires Etrangères et de la Coopération; • Monsieur	 André POH, Ministre Conseiller à la Mission Permanente de la République du Congo à Genève; • Monsieur	 Michel KOUKA MAPENGO, Conseiller juridique du Ministre des Affaires Etrangères et de la Coopération; • Monsieur MASSAMBA, Conseiller à la Mission Permanente de la République du Congo à Genève; • Madame Fernande MVILA, Conseillère à la Mission Permanente de la République du Congo à Genève; • Monsieur	 Raphaël MABOUNDOU, Conseiller à la Mission Permanente de la République du Congo à Genève; • Monsieur	 Désiré BONKOUTOU, Conseiller à l’ordre public du Ministre de l’Intérieur et de la Décentralisation; • Monsieur Guy NGANGUIA, Conseiller Administratif et Juridique du Ministre de l’Energie et de l’hydraulique; • Madame	 Virginie Sheryl Nicole N’DESSABEKA, Conseillère Administrative et Juridique de Madame la Ministre de la promotion de la femme et de l’intégration de la femme au développement; • Monsieur Benjamin OSSOMBO, Conseiller Administratif et Juridique; • Monsieur Romain OBA, Conseiller Politique du Ministre de la Communication; • Monsieur Emile NZONDO, Attaché Juridique à la Présidence de la République; • Madame	 Reine Chance CODDY SAKEH, Attaché Juridique au Ministère de l’Intérieur et de la Décentralisation; • Monsieur David IKITI, Directeur de la Coopération au Ministère de l’Enseignement primaire, secondaire et de l’alphabétisation; • Monsieur Cyrille LOUYA, Directeur du Management de la qualité au Ministère de la Justice et des Droits Humains; • Monsieur Roger KOUNI OKOGNA, Directeur de la Police Judiciaire; • Madame Carine ZIMBA ZERE, Représentante des populations autochtones; • Monsieur Alain BABELA YOKA, Représentant des populations autochtones; • Madame	 Claudia Inès FEVILYE DAWEY, Consultante au Ministère de la Communication; • Monsieur Marius ESSAKA, Journaliste au Ministère de la Communication; • Monsieur Prince NGATSONI, Caméraman au Ministère de la Communication; • Monsieur	 CAROMBO ELENGA, Agent du Protocole au Ministère de la Communication; • Madame Mélissa Divine POH, Stagiaire à la Mission Permanente de la République du Congo à Genève. 