Distr.: General 7 July 2014 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-seventh session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Ethiopia * The annex to the present report is circulated as received GE.14-07754  (E) *1407754* Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–154 3 A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–24 3 B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 25–154 6 II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 155–159 13  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 29 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its nineteenth session from 28 April to 9 May 2014. The review of Ethiopia was held at the 13th, meeting on 6 May 2014. The delegation of Ethiopia was headed by Berhane Gebre-Christos, State Minister of Foreign Affairs. At its 17th meeting, held on 8 May 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on Ethiopia. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Ethiopia: the Czech Republic, Kazakhstan and Namibia. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Ethiopia: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/19/ETH/1 and Corr.1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/19/ETH/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/19/ETH/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by the Czech Republic, Germany, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Ethiopia through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR). I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation of Ethiopia said that Ethiopia had taken a transparent and participatory approach in the preparation of the national report. The process had been led by the National Interministerial Committee and had involved the participation of various stakeholders and the dissemination of information on the implementation of the recommendations accepted at the first review. 6. Ethiopia had established a solid constitutional framework for the promotion and protection of human rights, which embedded ratified international human rights instruments. It guaranteed the human rights of all Ethiopians and ensured implementation of the rights of  the nations, nationalities and peoples of Ethiopia to self-determination, to the preservation of their language, culture and history, and to representation and self-administration in the federal and regional states.  7. Ethiopia had made major strides in the promotion and protection of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights. It had registered double digit growth over the previous 10 years and had integrated the goal of achieving good governance, the rule of law and human rights in the ongoing five-year Growth and Transformation Plan. 8. Ethiopia had adopted the first National Human Rights Action Plan (NHRAP). A Ministerial Steering Committee had been established for the formulation and implementation of the Plan, with the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission monitoring and evaluating its implementation. Mechanisms had been put in place for the participation of civil society. 9. The Proclamation on Charities and Societies ensured the realization of the right to freedom of association and provided an environment conducive to the growth and development of charities and societies. The Proclamation ensured accountability through predictability and transparency. It had created favourable conditions for the establishment and growth of grass-roots advocacy, and humanitarian and developmental civil society groups that could  thrive and serve their members and society at large. 10. The Proclamation required civil society organizations to allot 70 per cent of their budget for programme activities and the remaining portion for overhead costs. Agreements had also been signed with foreign civil society groups and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). 11. Ethiopia had zero tolerance for torture and inhuman, degrading or other cruel treatment,, which were prohibited by the Constitution. Measures, including the Prison Administration Proclamation, were in place to protect the rights of persons deprived of their liberty.  12. The Ethiopian Human Rights Commission monitored prison conditions and had provided capacity-building training to police and prison officers. Legal and policy measures had been taken on the rights of persons to freedom of thought, conscience and religion. Religious groups had established an interreligious council to maintain and advance interreligious tolerance. 13. Ethiopia recognized the imperatives of respecting human rights while countering terrorism. Proclamations, consistent with international human rights obligations, had been promulgated on anti-terrorism and anti-money-laundering and the financing of terrorism. The Anti-Terrorism Proclamation would not be used to silence opposition. 14. Freedom of expression continued to thrive. Ethiopians freely advocated their views either in support of or in criticism of government policies and measures. The Freedom of Mass Media and Access to Information Proclamation had been implemented in accordance with relevant constitutional guarantees. A national task force, spearheaded by the institution of the Ombudsman, had been established to oversee the effective implementation of access to information provisions of the Proclamation. 15. The delegation reported on the various measures taken to improve the welfare of children and the measures taken to promote and protect the rights of women and ensure their equal participation in political affairs, economic and social empowerment, ownership of property, inheritance of and rights over resources, as well as to combat harmful traditional practices, including female genital mutilation (FGM), and child, early and forced marriage. 16. Ethiopia was committed to implementing effectively the laws and policy frameworks for promoting the human rights of persons with disabilities by integrating disability as a cross-cutting sector of development. 17. Ethiopia had also initiated the process of ratification of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW) and had been working with host countries to advance the rights and interests of Ethiopian nationals abroad. It had intensified its efforts for the protection of the rights of migrants, with a special emphasis on migrant women and children. A national task force, chaired by the Deputy Prime Minister, had been established for that purpose.  18. Ethiopia maintained an open door policy towards refugees and was hosting over half a million of them. It worked closely with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other United Nations agencies to provide protection and assistance to the refugees and mitigate the effects of hosting a large refugee population on the local host communities and the environment. 19. Ethiopia was determined to ensure that the fifth national election, to be held in May 2015, would be free, fair and credible. The National Electoral Board and the judiciary had developed innovative systems for handling grievances and complaints during elections. 20. Ethiopia pursued a rights-based approach to development, with the objective of reducing poverty. Per capita income had increased and the proportion of the population living below the poverty line and the food poverty index had declined significantly. 21. Rapid economic growth had also enabled Ethiopia to undertake massive public investments in the social and infrastructure sectors. Investments in the construction of new health facilities and the upgrading of existing ones, and in strengthening the implementation of the health extension programme had brought about significant improvements in the health and well-being of the people. During 2012/2013, primary health service coverage had reached 93 per cent, while significant progress had been made in improving maternal and child health. Ethiopia had already achieved the Millennium Development Goal target of reducing child mortality by two thirds well before the 2015 deadline. 22. Massive investments had been made in the expansion of primary, secondary and tertiary education. Primary education was free for all citizens. The primary gross enrolment rate had increased to 95.4 per cent, and over 17.3 million children had been enrolled in primary schools in 2012/13. That progress had brought Ethiopia closer to achieving the Millennium Development Goal target of universal access to primary education. The gender parity index in primary schools as approximated by the ratio of girls to boys had reached 0.94:1 in 2012/13. 23. Ethiopia had invested massively in road maintenance and construction, in potable water supply and in energy and irrigation schemes, which demonstrated the positive impact of the economic growth on improving the non-income dimension of its citizens’ welfare. In line with its focus on eradicating poverty, the Government had allocated a higher share of its budget to pro-poor sectors. 24. Since the first UPR cycle, Ethiopia had ratified the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict (OP-CRC-AC) and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (OP-CRC-SC). Ethiopia had also submitted implementation reports under the International Convention on All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD), the Convention on All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), CRPD, the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT), the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights and the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 25. During the interactive dialogue, 112 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II below. 26. Algeria highlighted the adoption of the NHRAP and the commitment to eliminate poverty and implement economic, social and cultural rights. 27. Angola welcomed the ratification of international instruments and the submission of reports on the implementation of recommendations from the first UPR cycle. 28. Argentina highlighted Ethiopia’s hosting of a large number of refugees and efforts to combat discrimination against children. 29. Armenia commended Ethiopia’s commitment to the promotion of human rights, including respect for minority rights, cultural diversity and tolerance, and expressed concern at reported recent casualties in Oromia. 30. Australia congratulated Parliament’s 2013 ratification of the first NHRAP and was concerned that journalists continued to be detained under the Anti-Terrorism Proclamation. 31. Austria welcomed efforts made to address some of the recommendations it had made during the first UPR cycle. 32. Bangladesh noted the progress made, acknowledged the challenges faced, and stated that it was important to take into account Ethiopia’s request for technical assistance. 33. Belarus welcomed the series of legislative initiatives, especially the adoption of the NHRAP. 34. Belgium expressed continuing concern at several issues related to civil and political rights and welcomed the banning of FGM. 35. Benin noted progress on legislation, promotion of democracy and good economic governance, and ratification of regional and international human rights instruments. 36. Botswana noted efforts made to implement recommendations made in 2009. It also noted reports of interference with the judicial system. 37. Bhutan noted the implementation of many recommendations from the first review and the integration of sustainable development principles into development policies. 38. Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) noted the positive legislative measures adopted to strengthen institutions that promoted and protected human rights. 39. Brazil welcomed ratification of CRPD and adoption of the National Action Plan on Gender and Development as well as establishment of children’s rights committees at federal, regional and local levels. 40. Burkina Faso congratulated Ethiopia for the progress made in implementing the recommendations of the first UPR cycle.  41. Burundi congratulated Ethiopia on the adoption of its NHRAP and a national programme for good governance.  42. Cabo Verde noted the economic growth, progress in poverty reduction, provision of social services and introduction of the NHRAP. 43. Canada asked what progress Ethiopia had made to provide for free and independent media and to uphold civil and political rights. 44. The Central African Republic encouraged Ethiopia to take measures to eliminate all forms of discrimination against women and to address the problem of street children. 45. Chad noted the strengthening of human rights institutions, the creation of an NHRAP, the ratification of international human rights instruments and the adoption of national strategies. 46. Chile acknowledged efforts to continue advancing the promotion and protection of all human rights. 47. China welcomed the economic development, establishment of the NHRAP, and protection of the rights of women, children and persons with disabilities. 48. The Congo appreciated commitment to the recommendations from the first UPR cycle .  49. Costa Rica noted advances since the first UPR. It was concerned about restrictions on freedom of expression and freedom of association. 50. Côte d’Ivoire noted the incorporation in domestic law of international conventions ratified by Ethiopia, and measures taken to promote civil, political and cultural rights. 51. Cuba congratulated Ethiopia on its excellent national report and presentation and wished it a successful review. 52. Cyprus stated that despite the criminalization of harmful traditional practices and efforts by Ethiopia, FGM remained widespread. 53. The Czech Republic commended Ethiopia’s progress in ensuring economic and social rights but was concerned at the gaps in the realization of civil and political rights.  54. The Democratic Republic of the Congo acknowledged Ethiopia’s progress in all sectors, adoption of the NHRAP and strengthening of women’s and children’s rights.  55. Denmark welcomed, inter alia, the proposals in the NHRAP to promote the rights of vulnerable groups, but was concerned that the Plan did not provide a sufficient role for civil society. 56. Djibouti said that Ethiopia had contributed to the African Union since its inception and had played a significant role in combating regional terrorism.  57. The delegation of Ethiopia stated that the pillars underpinning implementation of the NHRAP were: creating supervisory bodies to monitor the performance plans of implementing institutions; raising awareness of the Plan; collaborating with development partners and civil associations, and public participation; utilizing the national human rights institutions (NHRIs); and promoting human rights education. 58. Accepted UPR recommendations, reports to United Nations and African Union human rights bodies and corresponding feedback had been taken into consideration in developing the Action Plan, thus providing a good opportunity for Ethiopia to implement its international commitments. 59. The Action Plan envisaged that NHRIs would act as independent monitoring bodies, while the Ombudsman would monitor implementation of the Plan in connection with the exercise of administrative and executive powers. Each implementing body had developed detailed annual plans, which were monitored by federal and regional legislative bodies. Comprehensive reporting mechanisms had also been put in place at the federal and regional levels. 60. The delegation stated that the Constitution guaranteed the independence of the judiciary and set out court structures and powers. Judicial independence was key to Ethiopia’s legal system. To increase access to justice, there was a need to build capacity and train more judges, prosecutors and police officers; a number of steps had been taken in that direction. 61. Ecuador recognized recent progress in human rights, including ratification of CRPD, and noted the creation of the NHRAP.  62. Egypt noted measures for ensuring the broadest possible enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms. 63. Equatorial Guinea noted the successful introduction of human rights legislation, the priority given to fairness in education, and improved and extended health care.  64. Estonia stated that harmful traditional practices should be condemned, marital rape recognized as a criminal act and measures taken against domestic violence.  65. Finland acknowledged action taken to introduce human rights in legislation and in practice. 66. France commended ratification of CRPD and welcomed the progress Ethiopia had made in ensuring women’s rights and social rights.  67. Gabon welcomed ratification of international human rights instruments and measures taken to protect the most vulnerable and combat discrimination against women and children. 68. Germany made recommendations. 69. Ghana stated that Ethiopia must, inter alia, address concerns raised by UNHCR; ratify ICRMW and other treaties and protocols, and submit periodic reports due in 2014. Ethiopia should also decriminalize defamation, issue a standing invitation to all special procedures and establish an independent NHRI in compliance with the Paris Principles. 70. Haiti welcomed adoption of the NHRAP and ratification of CRPD.  71. The Holy See stated that while poverty had been reduced, challenges remained.  72. Honduras commended legislative reforms criminalizing child marriage and hoped the country would continue to protect the rights of vulnerable groups.  73. Hungary commended Ethiopia for its dedication to economic development and efforts regarding gender-based violence. It regretted restrictions on freedom of expression. 74. Indonesia welcomed ratification of the CRPD and the forthcoming ratification of ICRMW. It applauded the focus on education, including increased resource allocation. 75. Ireland noted legislative restrictions on the space for civil society action and on the freedoms of expression and association. 76. Italy welcomed the de facto moratorium on executions. It encouraged further action against gender discrimination. 77. Japan expressed concern at the legislative restrictions on civic and media groups. It encouraged ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance; and the issuing of a standing invitation to the special procedures. It regarded highly Ethiopia’s proactive stance in accepting refugees and returnees. 78. Kenya noted progress and welcomed ratification of OP-CRC-AC. It referred to the challenges faced by EHRC and the Ombudsman. 79. Kuwait commended the NHRAP and the GTP, which was designed to transform Ethiopia into a middle-income economy. 80. Kyrgyzstan noted efforts to implement previous recommendations; reforms to legislative, institutional and policy mechanisms; and the implementation of the GTP. 81. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic noted, inter alia, the adoption of the NHRAP; and efforts to promote gender mainstreaming and ensure access to education. 82. Latvia noted positively the adoption of the NHRAP and the opening of the EHRC regional offices. It remained concerned at violence against women and children, particularly corporal punishment of children. 83. Lesotho welcomed in particular Ethiopia’s continuing efforts to protect specific groups’ rights, such as the rights of persons with disabilities, women and children. 84. Libya welcomed the NHRAP and the GTP for 2010–2015, aimed at transforming the country into a middle-income economy. 85. Liechtenstein noted the priority given to the protection and empowerment of women at the federal and regional levels, and to treaty bodies’ conclusions in that area.  86. Madagascar noted the adoption of policies to promote and protect human rights, including the NHRAP and the GTP for 2010–2015. 87. Malaysia, commending the establishment of EHRC and the NHRAP, encouraged adequate resource provision for them. 88. Maldives appreciated steps to promote the role of women. It noted cooperation with United Nations mechanisms and challenges faced by Ethiopia, including climate change.  89. Mali noted ratification of CRPD and the Trafficking in Persons Protocol. It commended efforts to strengthen the judiciary. 90. Mauritania appreciated that Ethiopia was hosting hundreds of refugees from neighbouring countries while ensuring their rights in cooperation with UNHCR. 91. Mauritius commended the adoption of various measures demonstrating Ethiopia’s human rights commitment. It encouraged Ethiopia to continue in that vein.  92. Mexico noted legislative progress and Ethiopia’s commitment to human rights. It hoped that UPR would assist Ethiopia in overcoming the challenges it faced. 93. Montenegro enquired about measures to combat human trafficking and support victims; and to establish a complaints mechanism to investigate reports of torture committed by security personnel.  94. Morocco commended the economic development and the GTP. It welcomed the commitment to poverty eradication and the Millennium Development Goals. 95. The delegation stated that the Government was committed to addressing gender inequality and enhancing women’s empowerment and reported on measures taken. Those measures had led to falling statistics for FGM and early, child and forced marriage. Religious leaders had also been instrumental in combating FGM and other harmful practices.  96. Affirmative action to empower women was in place, fostering the increased participation of women in public affairs, including in the decision-making process. 97. Measures had been taken to ensure women’s equal access to economic resources and the growing number of women entrepreneurs was encouraging. Several strategies, packages and action plans had been devised to reduce maternal and child mortality, which had helped ensure achievement of the relevant Millennium Development Goals. 98. Ethiopia was also committed to improving the rights and welfare of children and was taking steps to eliminate corporal punishment in family settings, which was prohibited under the Constitution. 99. Mozambique commended the opening of branches of EHRC in some states. It praised the ratification of CRPD.  100. Myanmar commended the high annual average economic growth rate over the previous decade. It noted measures to eradicate harmful practices.  101. Namibia applauded Ethiopia for hosting refugees and providing them life-saving assistance. It noted the NHRAP. 102. Nepal welcomed Ethiopia’s success in poverty eradication and achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. It commended measures regarding food security and education. 103. The Netherlands commended the NHRAP. It was concerned about the treatment of journalists and members of opposition groups. 104. Nicaragua noted discrimination against minority and vulnerable groups, despite the measures undertaken. It commended the creation of EHRC. 105. Niger noted the importance of the adoption of the NHRAP. It appreciated measures to combat gender-based violence. 106. Nigeria praised the translation into local languages of human rights instruments. It urged Ethiopia to create an atmosphere that enshrined human rights. 107. Norway was concerned about the space for civil society and opposition parties in the run-up to the 2015 elections.  108. Paraguay noted action plans and ratification of CRPD. It encouraged ratification of treaties, independent access to prisons and elimination of torture. 109. The Philippines acknowledged efforts to promote women’s and migrants’ rights; combat FGM, gender-based violence and trafficking; and establish a minimum age for marriage. 110. Portugal welcomed the NHRAP, the death penalty moratorium, and efforts to improve access to drinking water. 111. The Republic of Korea welcomed the adoption by Ethiopia of the NHRAP, ratification of CRPD and its anti-corruption drive. 112. The Russian Federation commended progress and noted the NHRAP, the report on prison conditions, and the training of security forces. 113. Rwanda commended Ethiopia on its efforts to promote and protect human rights, including through the efforts of EHRC. 114. Saudi Arabia appreciated the ratification of CRPD and the Palermo Protocol, and policies for criminal justice to ensure peace and security. 115. Senegal commended the implementation of recommendations and the improved enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights, and encouraged continuation of such efforts. 116. Serbia encouraged the authorities to continue with the effective implementation of international human rights obligations, particularly protection of the rights of women and children. 117. Sierra Leone encouraged Ethiopia to raise the age of criminal responsibility, improve conditions of detention and take measures to eliminate child labour. 118. Singapore noted better access to reformed health care, gender parity in tertiary education and improved political and economic participation of women. 119. Several platforms, including the tripartite Civil Society Sector Working Group had been established to facilitate the smooth and proper implementation of legislation through dialogue.  120. The Government of Ethiopia and the Development Assistance Group had agreed to make joint periodic reviews of the impact of the Law to enhance the implementation of the Proclamation. The result indicators of the implementation had shown that the Proclamation had several encouraging features. 121. The Community Development Plan had enabled the Government to ensure better sequencing, delivery and standards of, and access to, basic services and infrastructure. Ethiopia would continue to make improvements in the Plan’s areas. Early indicators of its outcomes showed encouraging results..It was strengthening the organized local accountability system, giving more voice to communities in the governance of local affairs, and had improved the welfare and productive employment of women. 122. Ethiopia had made efforts to foil the destructive actions of extremist groups whose destructive acts had been condemned by leaders of various religions. 123. Slovakia encouraged effective implementation of the NHRAP and the National Strategy on the Elimination of Harmful Traditional Practices. 124. Slovenia commended the NHRAP and accession to CRPD and OP-CRC-AC. Freedom of expression was important. 125. Somalia noted Ethiopia’s commitment to human rights, and commended its refugee policy and efforts to maintain peace in Africa.  126. South Africa applauded attainment of the Millennium Development Goals, social protection, the GTP, and Ethiopia’s contribution to maintaining regional peace. 127. South Sudan commended the NHRAP, noted the economic development, and encouraged implementation of the poverty reduction policy. 128. Spain welcomed the moratorium on the death penalty and national strategies to combat violence against women. 129. Sri Lanka recognized efforts to promote human rights, eradicate poverty and reduce child and maternal mortality, noting progress in education. 130. The State of Palestine noted improved women’s rights and health-care access. It expressed concern regarding unequal health-care provision and maternal mortality. 131. The Sudan was pleased that Ethiopia had positively considered its recommendations made in the first UPR and had been able to generate more than 2,600,000 jobs in the previous two years. 132. Sweden expressed concern about civil society exclusion, and limitations on the freedoms of expression and association under the Anti-Terrorism Proclamation. 133. Switzerland remained concerned about limitations on civil society and the freedoms of expression and association, detention conditions, torture and arbitrary detention. 134. Thailand commended ratification of the CRPD and the Palermo Protocol, the newly-established NHRI, the NHRAP and enhanced health-care access. 135. Togo noted ratification of the CRPD, legislation on civil registration, and strategies to reduce poverty and attain the Millenium Development Goals. 136. Tunisia encouraged further efforts to combat violence and discrimination against women and children, and to facilitate civil society action. 137. Uganda noted improved access to potable water, creation of the “Health Development Army” and the NHRAP. 138. The United Arab Emirates commended Ethiopia’s efforts to eliminate poverty by the adoption of new laws and the development of programmes for transforming the country into a middle-income economy. 139. The United Republic of Tanzania applauded the GTP. It encouraged further efforts towards gender parity in education and attaining the Millennium Development Goals. 140. The United States of America was concerned at restrictions on civil society activity and the arbitrary detention of human rights defenders, journalists and opposition political figures. 141. Uruguay noted progress since the first UPR cycle, highlighting the NHRAP. 142. Bolivia (Plurinational State of) welcomed the advances towards the eradication of poverty, reduced infant mortality and improved access to health services. 143. Viet Nam appreciated the effective implementation of the GTP, integrating strategies of economic development, enhancement of democracy and assurances of social justice. 144. Yemen commended the enactment of several laws for the protection of human rights, the fight against poverty, the progressive achievements in the field of development, and the expansion of the activity of EHRC. 145. Zambia commended Ethiopia’s constitutional guarantees of human rights and noted its efforts for poverty eradication, reduction in child mortality, increased access to school and the provision of health services. 146. Zimbabwe noted Ethiopia’s commitment to economic, social and cultural rights evidenced by the adoption of programmes to ensure food security, potable water supply, education and health care.  147. Afghanistan applauded Ethiopia’s initiatives for empowerment of women, eradication of harmful practices and discrimination against women and violence against children. 148. The United Kingdom expressed concern regarding limitations on freedom of expression, mistreatment of prisoners and abuse allegations. 149. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea appreciated the country’s commitment to, and progress in, protecting and promoting human rights. 150. The delegation stated that legislative acts triggered by the Government’s policy reforms had created an enabling environment for the media. The Freedom of Mass Media and Access to Information Proclamation had brought about important reforms. Public interest disclosure legislation for the protection of whistle-blowers would be submitted for public deliberation. A public record policy, legislation and regulations were being finalized with a view to facilitating the speedy implementation of the Proclamation. 151. The Government had recently organized stakeholder consultative forums to assist in identifying structural and institutional shortcomings in the media sector: problems included inadequate media professionalism, pluralism, competition or self-regulatory mechanisms, an underdeveloped advertising market, poor media management capacity and a lack of governmental subsidies. The Government had encouraged the media community to establish an independent media council to regulate misconduct. Higher professional training institutions were being established in more than 18 universities.  152. Conventional criminal procedures had proved unequal to the task of combating terrorism. The Anti-Terrorism Proclamation had drawn heavily on best legislative practices from around the world. The Proclamation was never used to stifle dissent. The very few individuals who allegedly had journalistic backgrounds had been tried and convicted for their involvement in clandestine terrorist networks rather than for their journalistic activities. 153. The National Defence Force had earned respect for its integrity and discipline during all its peacekeeping activities in Africa. 154. Ethiopia had put in place democratic mechanisms for regional and national elections. The members of an independent Electoral Board were appointed through a transparent and democratic vetting mechanism involving all political parties. Representatives of almost all parties participated in an inter-party dialogue forum to settle electoral disputes. National and regional public service broadcasters and their commercial counterparts offered free air slots to competing political parties during electoral campaigns. The law permitted civil society to observe the national elections. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations.. 155. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue listed below enjoy the support of Ethiopia: 155.1 Consider ratifying ICERD (Burkina Faso); 155.2 Continue its process towards the ratification of ICRMW (Indonesia); 155.3 Step up efforts to ratify ICRMW (Philippines); 155.4 Consider the possibility of ratifying ICRMW (Ecuador); 155.5 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict (Estonia); 155.6 Ratify the OP-CAT-AC and OP-CAT-SC (Congo); 155.7 Ratify the African Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa (Kampala Convention) (Uganda); 155.8 Consider ratifying the Kampala Convention (Namibia) (Serbia); 155.9 Consider ratifying the Kampala Convention and drawing up a plan of action for internally displaced persons (Sierra Leone); 155.10 Continue implementing laws in accordance with the universally agreed human rights norms and principles (Lesotho); 155.11 Continue to implement the NHRAP (Libya); 155.12 Continue to work for the full implementation of the NHRAP (Thailand); 155.13 Fully implement the NHRAP (Republic of Korea); 155.14 Accelerate the implementation of the NHRAP, adopted in 2013 (Sudan); 155.15 Implement and monitor the NHRAP, enabling civil society organizations to participate in the process (Australia); 155.16 Continue implementing the National Action Plan on Gender and Development (Algeria); 155.17 Continue work on the national action plan launched regarding the good governance framework within the administration (Equatorial Guinea);  155.18 Strengthen the role and mandate of the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission (Mauritius); 155.19 Further strengthen the capacity of the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission (EHRC) (Afghanistan); 155.20 Work on the strengthening of the capacities of important national entities such as EHRC (Nicaragua); 155.21 Strengthen the institutional capacities of EHRC as well as the Office of the Ombudsman (Kenya); 155.22 Further strengthen the capacity of the institution of Ombudsman (Serbia); 155.23 Strengthen EHRC in order to make it compliant with the Paris Principles (Namibia); 155.24 Strengthen ongoing efforts to bring EHRC into conformity with the Paris Principles (Sierra Leone); 155.25 In line with the vigorous actions already undertaken, endow EHRC with a mandate in compliance with the Paris Principles1 (Mali); 155.26 Continue strengthening the national human rights institutions and promoting and protecting the rights of all segments of the population (Nepal); 155.27 Equip the national human rights institutions with the necessary resources and capacities to effectively monitor the human rights situation and to independently investigate, provide appeals and redress for alleged human rights violations in relation to the resettlement of communities through the Commune Development Programme (Austria); 155.28 Continue efforts to promote and protect human rights (Kuwait); 155.29 Continue to bring about the strengthening of the structures for human rights protection in accordance with international standards (Russian Federation); 155.30 Continue efforts to elaborate uniform strategies and programmes for the promotion of human rights in all regions, in spite of the nation’s diversity and complexity (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 155.31 Strengthen work on the wide dissemination of information on international norms and standards, and also the international obligations of Ethiopia in the field of promoting and protecting human rights (Russian Federation); 155.32 Further strengthen existing efforts to integrate human rights in national development policies, strategies and plans (Cuba); 155.33 Increase international cooperation to guarantee economic, cultural and social rights (Saudi Arabia); 155.34 Call upon the international community in implementing and disseminating human rights instruments through technical assistance and capacity-building programmes (Uganda); 155.35 Enhance efforts to further strengthen democratic institutions in the country (Afghanistan); 155.36 Invite the international community to provide Ethiopia with requested technical assistance with a view to developing the capacities of federal and regional human rights institutions (Niger); 155.37 Establish mechanisms for meaningful participation of civil society at the federal and regional level in the process of implementing and monitoring the NHRAP (Norway); 155.38 Further strengthen the capacity to promote children’s rights at the federal, regional and local levels (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 155.39 Further develop and expand human rights awareness-raising programmes in the country (Armenia); 155.40 Strengthen the forum for dialogue between civil society and the Government (South Sudan); 155.41 Take steps to ensure the active participation of civil society in the area of prevention, awareness-raising and education on existing laws and policies (Denmark); 155.42 Improve engagement with civil society groups, including youth and women’s associations, to boost human rights (Nigeria); 155.43 Further enhance engagement with civil society groups registered in the country, including local youth and women’s associations, in the promotion and protection of human rights (Bhutan); 155.44 Further enhance engagement with civil society groups registered in the country, including local youth and women’s associations, in the promotion and protection of human rights (Cuba); 155.45 Intensify efforts to build the capacity of law enforcement authorities on the basic rights of citizens (Rwanda); 155.46 Continue providing training in international humanitarian law to judges, prosecutors, the police and the defence forces (Serbia); 155.47 Continue cooperation with the United Nations and other international organizations to overcome the remaining constraints and challenges (Lao People’s Democratic Republic); 155.48 Strengthen cooperation with United Nations human rights mechanisms, including by permitting visits from mandate holders (Hungary); 155.49 Tighten cooperation with the human rights mechanisms of the United Nations, allowing visits of the special procedures mandate holders (Chile); 155.50 Grant full access to special rapporteurs and special procedures mandate holders to visit the country, notably the Special Rapporteurs on the right to education, the right to food and on violence against women (Netherlands); 155.51 Accept the outstanding requests for visits from the special procedures and respond to the communications sent by OHCHR which are awaiting replies (Spain); 155.52 Continue current efforts to ensure equality between men and women (Egypt); 155.53 Intensify efforts to eliminate all forms of discrimination against women (Burundi); 155.54 Take robust measures to promote gender equality and safeguard the rights of women and girls (China); 155.55 Continue to promote gender equality and ensure equal opportunities for all women and girls (Singapore); 155.56 Improve the access of women to employment as well as to political life (Senegal); 155.57 Continue increasing the access of women to employment, participation in public life, education, housing and health (Chile): 155.58 Redouble efforts aimed at increasing women’s access to employment, participation in public life, education, housing and health (Ecuador); 155.59 Continue to increase women’s access to employment, public life, education, housing and health (South Africa); 155.60 Expand its policies aimed at creating income-generating opportunities for women, and improve working conditions of women in the private and informal sectors (State of Palestine) 155.61 Further work on political, economic and social empowerment of women (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 155.62 Ensure equality among women and men in their family relations and continue to combat violence against women and children (Haiti); 155.63 Remain steadfast in pursuing its impressive policies towards gender equality, particularly by strengthening measures to eradicate gender-based violence (Lesotho); 155.64 Promote and protect the human rights of all persons belonging to vulnerable groups (Germany); 155.65 Continue actions aimed at the eradication of acts of racism and other forms of discrimination and intolerance (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 155.66 Increase efforts and adopt all the necessary measures for the fight against discrimination in all its forms, particularly against minorities, and among them the most vulnerable children and women (Nicaragua); 155.67 Adopt legislative or other measures and awareness-raising campaigns to combat and prevent discrimination and societal stigma; in particular against persons with disabilities and persons affected by HIV/AIDS (Portugal); 155.68 Incorporate the crime of torture in the Penal Code, including a definition of torture with all the elements listed in article 1 of the Convention against Torture (Chile); 155.69 Introduce a definition of torture in its Penal Code that covers all of the elements contained in article 1 of the Convention against Torture (Kyrgyzstan); 155.70 Continue efforts to ensure that clear, independent and effective complaints mechanisms are in place for individuals’ complaints concerning mistreatment by security and law enforcement authorities (Finland); 155.71 Further improve the conditions of prisons to make them more conducive to the rehabilitation of inmates as per the comment of EHRC (Bhutan); 155.72 Improve the prison system and the situation of prisoners based on the 2013 report of EHRC on the situation of human rights in the country’s prisons (Russian Federation); 155.73 Increase efforts to effectively enforce the provisions of the Penal Code on sexual and domestic violence and prosecute any such acts (Liechtenstein); 155.74 Enhance assistance, shelter and rehabilitation for victims of sexual and domestic violence (Liechtenstein); 155.75 Ensure the allocation of adequate resources for the effective implementation of policies and programmes against violence against women and trafficking in persons (Philippines); 155.76 Continue to fight against FGM (Djibouti); 155.77 Increase the resources devoted to the prevention of violence against women and of FGM (Italy); 155.78 Continue efforts to address FGM, early marriage, and violence against women and girls which remain deeply rooted, according to reports (Japan); 155.79 Further pursue the national strategy and the action plan on the elimination of harmful traditional practices and FGM (Myanmar); 155.80 Continue its existing efforts to implement the national strategy and action plan on the elimination of harmful traditional practices and FGM (Rwanda); 155.81 Adopt additional measures for the elimination of FGM and traditional practices which cause pain to women (Spain); 155.82 Step up efforts to ensure the effective implementation of the ban on FGM, in particular through the implementation of preventive measures such as the dissemination of information and awareness-raising among populations at risk (Belgium); 155.83 Intensify efforts in the direction of sensitizing all stakeholders to prevent FGM (Cyprus); 155.84 Continue efforts to prevent violence against children and their exploitation in the workplace (Algeria); 155.85 Enhance endeavours to abolish corporal punishment of children (Cyprus); 155.86 Continue strengthening the existing mechanisms in the fight against trafficking in persons, particularly of women and children (Angola) (Cuba); 155.87 Step up efforts to combat trafficking in persons, including training for officials, criminal prosecution of perpetrators as well as developing measures for the protection and rehabilitation of the victims of trafficking in persons (Belarus); 155.88 Continue strengthening the rehabilitation and reintegration of victims of human trafficking with the support of the international community (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 155.89 Strengthen the institutional capacity of the National Council to Combat Trafficking in Persons (Burundi); 155.90 Develop a specific programme to try and punish traffickers of women and children (Honduras); 155.91 Strengthen the criminal justice system to ensure easy and fair accessibility to all citizens (Zimbabwe); 155.92 Respect the right to a fair trial, notably by ensuring that legal procedures are respected (Switzerland); 155.93 Strengthen the capacity of the Legal Protection Centre for Children to strengthen the administration of child justice (Serbia); 155.94 Take necessary measures to open the office of the Federal Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission in the remaining two national regional States (Bhutan); 155.95 Take the necessary measures to open the office of the Federal Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission in the remaining two national regional states (South Sudan); 155.96 Continue strengthening the role and contribution of the family in society (Egypt); 155.97 For the continued development of the country, take into account and support the family, based on the stable relationship between a man and a woman, as the natural and fundamental unit of society, both in taxation and general legislation (Holy See); 155.98 Strengthen the national system of birth registration, extending it to all persons born on Ethiopian soil (Senegal); 155.99 Raise the capacity of the Vital Events and National Identity Card Registration Agency in order to ensure the right of all persons to birth and death registration (Sudan); 155.100 Improve the existing activities and mechanisms to strengthen intercultural and interreligious dialogue (Burundi); 155.101 Further promote tolerance and dialogue between different ethnic and religious groups (Armenia); 155.102 Keep encouraging interreligious and inter-ethnic dialogue so that Ethiopia’s pluralism of traditions and cultures remains an enriching and valued dimension of the country (Holy See); 155.103 Protect and promote the right of Ethiopians to practise their religious faith or beliefs, including by enhancing the dialogue between different faith communities to address interreligious tensions (Canada); 155.104 Take steps to guarantee the political rights of its people, freedom of expression, association and assembly, in particular (Japan); 155.105 Take measures to ensure the increased freedom of expression of journalists and media workers (Republic of Korea); 155.106 Ensure that legitimate acts of political dissent are not criminalized and freedom of opinion, of the media and of assembly are fully respected when applying the Terrorist Act of 2009, in line with the NHRAP (Germany); 155.107 Review its legislation to ensure that any limitations on the right to freedom of expression, both online and off-line, are in full compliance with article 19 of ICCPR, in particular by providing for a defence of truth in all defamation cases (Ireland); 155.108 Ensure that journalists and workers in the media can pursue their profession in a free environment which guarantees the rights of freedom of opinion and expression for all persons (Chile); 155.109 Strengthen members-based and members-driven civil society by further facilitating the existing mechanisms to generate funds from local sources (Cuba); 155.110 Enhance measures on the establishment of grass-roots members-based and members-driven civil society organizations (Somalia); 155.111 Further strengthen locally based, members-driven and funded civil society groups in the country (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 155.112 Ensure that the right to participation of all persons promoting and protecting human rights is guaranteed (Switzerland); 155.113 Take further measures to ensure the safety and freedom of action of human rights defenders (Finland); 155.114 Continue improving the outreach to all ethnic communities to actively participate in the political process so as to strengthen Ethiopia’s democracy and prevent potential conflicts  (Holy See); 155.115 Take necessary measures to enable all citizens to fully take part in the democratic process in advance of the 2015 elections, including allowing open and inclusive electoral debate, civic and voter education, election monitoring and the active engagement of civil society organizations and independent media (Canada); 155.116 Continue to grant all political parties unfettered access to the print and electronic media for fair elections (Nigeria); 155.117 Further strengthen measures to enhance the participation of women in decision-making (Sri Lanka); 155.118 Further its efforts to increase the participation of women in politics through the integration of gender issues into national policies (Equatorial Guinea); 155.119 Continue its positive campaigning to raise awareness of women’s social and political rights (Malaysia); 155.120 Further strengthen measures to ensure participation of women in political affairs (Afghanistan); 155.121 Take new measures aimed at strengthening the existing mechanism to reduce unemployment in the country (Angola); 155.122 Continue strengthening small and medium-scale enterprises to create more job opportunities for the youth (Sri Lanka); 155.123 Continue applying the benefits of economic growth to all the population (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 155.124 Intensify the implementation of its pro-poor policies, projects and programmes (Zimbabwe) 155.125 Intensify poverty alleviation and promote economic and social development so as to improve people’s living standards (China); 155.126 Continue addressing the challenges in poverty reduction (Myanmar); 155.127 Continue policies aimed at fighting extreme poverty, as well as those aimed at achieving food security and infrastructure development (Côte d’Ivoire); 155.128 Strengthen strategies and programmes for poverty reduction and job creation, making them uniform among the nine regional states, for better effectiveness of human rights (Burkina Faso); 155.129 Strengthen the implementation of the Growth and Transformation Plan to build on the achievements of poverty reduction (Morocco); 155.130 Continue efforts to implement the Growth and Transformation Plan for 2010–2015 in order to improve enjoyment of economic and social rights and to achieve social justice (United Arab Emirates); 155.131 Continue strengthening the application of the Growth and Transformation Plan in the fight against poverty, to which it has assigned auspiciously 69 per cent of the budget (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 155.132 Strengthen measures taken at national level to ensure food security in the country (Rwanda); 155.133 Establish strategies to sustain and reinforce progress recently made in the area of food security (Viet Nam); 155.134 Continue the measures implemented for the right to water and sanitation within the framework of General Assembly resolution 64/292 (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 155.135 Continue efforts to improve the social sectors, including through technical assistance (Sierra Leone); 155.136 Increase access to primary health care for the populations living in rural areas (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 155.137 Step up efforts to improve health services for all its citizens, especially in the rural areas (Malaysia); 155.138 Develop measures for social protection, including through the adoption of a system of health coverage (Niger); 155.139 In cooperation with the World Health Organization and relevant international organizations, continue to improve access to quality health care for its people (Singapore); 155.140 Continue to undertake effective plans and programmes to ensure the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, especially in terms of health through measures to increase access to health services for the public (Sri Lanka); 155.141 Step up efforts to improve health services and reduce the maternal mortality rate, including through the allocation of increased resources for health-care provision in rural areas (State of Palestine); 155.142 Focus on policies that seek to improve access to, and the quality of, the health and education sectors (Côte d’Ivoire); 155.143 Continue supporting health and educational institutions, both public and private, so that excessive bureaucratic constraints may not weaken their efficiency (Holy See); 155.144 Strengthen free primary education across the country’s territory (Haiti); 155.145 Strengthen current measures to ensure that primary education is free and compulsory for all children (Egypt); 155.146 Redouble its efforts to provide quality education for children and implement programmes that would encourage them to go to school (Malaysia); 155.147 Continue efforts to strengthen the quality of, and access to, education and make basic education free for all, especially in rural areas (Maldives); 155.148 Further intensify efforts to ensure equal access to quality education, and expand primary education to children in their mother tongue (Sudan); 155.149 Continue efforts to improve quality education and ensure access to education in all areas of the country (Yemen); 155.150 Ensure continuous progress in the area of the right to education, including the inclusion of human rights education in the curriculum (Indonesia); 155.151 Allocate greater resources so as to significantly improve the rate of school enrolment among girls and the literacy rate among women and girls (Viet Nam); 155.152 Continue building the capacity of health and social services to provide care for children with disabilities (Egypt); 155.153 Continue with efforts to protect the rights of unaccompanied and separated children and female refugees (Zambia); 155.154 Adopt measures to ensure the issuance of birth certificates to newborn refugees (Argentina); 155.155 Develop a strategy and national plan of action on the protection of migrants, refugees and internally displaced persons with the technical support of international and national partners (South Africa); 155.156 Reinforce the strategy and the national action plan concerning internally displaced persons (Haiti); 155.157 Strengthen existing efforts to ensure a safe and healthy environment (Saudi Arabia); 155.158 Address issues of environmental degradation and disaster management, in order to ensure the protection of the environment (Maldives); 155.159 Further strengthen existing efforts to integrate human rights in the national development policies, strategies and plans (South Sudan); 155.160 Encourage and contribute to the design of the most suitable socioeconomic integration plan for the subregion, as part of the developmental challenges of the subregion (Somalia); 155.161 Continue strengthening the application of the Anti-Terrorism Proclamation, providing education in human rights for those charged with enforcing the law (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 155.162 Carry out actions against terrorism in full respect for human rights law and standards and without undue restrictions on fundamental freedoms, such as freedom of expression and freedom of the press, and on civil society space (Italy); 155.163 Take concrete measures to ensure that efforts to counter terrorism are carried out in full compliance with the Constitution and international human rights obligations, including respect for fair trial guarantees and freedom of expression (Norway); 155.164 Continue to combat terrorism in the subregion in order to preserve peace, security and prosperity (Djibouti); 155.165 Strengthen anti-terrorism by incorporating capacity with other African States to fight the scourge of terror (Nigeria); 155.166 Strengthen measures to fight against terrorism and extremism in the country and in the Horn of Africa, including through subregional and regional organizations, as they undermine the practical enjoyment of human rights particularly economic, social and cultural rights (Somalia); 155.167 Intensify efforts to make segments of the society benefit from equitable economic growth (Morocco); 155.168 Promote and protect the rights of the peasants and other persons working in rural areas (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 155.169 Strengthen its role in maintaining peace and security in the Horn of Africa (Somalia); 155.170 Develop projects for the transfer of technology with the Ethiopian diaspora, with the aim of supporting the establishment of productive projects in the communities from which they originate (Mexico). 156. The following recommendations enjoy the support of Ethiopia which considers that they have already been implemented or are in the process of implementation: 156.1 Allow independent observers access to places of detention (Paraguay); 156.2 Develop programmes to combat violence against women (Malaysia); 156.3 Respect the rights of all persons to due process of law, particularly the presumption of innocence (Germany); 156.4 Apply article 36 of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations in order to ensure that, if a detained foreign national so requests, the competent authority shall, without delay, inform his or her consular post (Austria); 156.5 Fully protect members of opposition groups, political activists and journalists who are exercising their rights to freedom of expression, association and peaceful assembly from arbitrary detention (Canada); 156.6 Repeal provisions of the legislation that can be used to criminalize the right to freedom of expression (Slovakia); 156.7 Remove any structural and institutional impediments that hinder the implementation of the Freedom of the Mass Media and Access to Information Proclamation (Denmark); 156.8 Take the necessary measures in order for the law on media and access to information to comply with ICCPR (France); 156.9 Consider adopting universal health-care coverage to ensure health.care provision for all, with particular attention given to vulnerable groups and those living in rural areas (Thailand); 156.10 Extend free primary education throughout the country (Namibia); 156.11 Provide the proper framework for appeals within the 2009 anti.terrorist law in order to guarantee respect for fundamental rights (France). 157. The following recommendations will be examined by Ethiopia, which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-seventh session of the Human Rights Council, in September 2014: 157.1 Sign and ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Madagascar); 157.2 Consider signing and ratifying the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Cabo Verde); 157.3 Consider ratifying the Optional Protocols to CRC on the involvement of children in armed conflict and on a communications procedure (Brazil); 157.4 Criminalize all forms of corporal punishment against children and sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to CRC on a communications procedure (Portugal); 157.5 Consider ratifying ILO Convention No. 189 (2011) concerning Decent Work for Domestic Workers (Philippines) (Uruguay); 157.6 Consider lifting the reservations made to articles 17 to 19 (on wage-earning employment, self-employment and liberal professions) of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees (Sierra Leone); 157.7 Implement fully its 1995 Constitution, including the freedoms of association, expression and assembly, for independent political parties, ethnic and religious groups and NGOs (Australia); 157.8 Issue a permanent open invitation to the special procedures (Spain); 157.9 Invite the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment to visit Ethiopia (United Kingdom); 157.10 Adopt measures which guarantee the non-occurrence of cases of torture and ill-treatment in places of detention and, among them, establish an independent national preventive mechanism against torture (Spain); 157.11 Amend the Criminal Code and the Federal Family Code in order to criminalize marital rape and FGM (Honduras); 157.12 Ensure the full independence and impartiality of the judiciary, in conformity with international standards (Botswana); 157.13 Eliminate all obstacles to the development of NGOs, in particular the financial procedures for those financed with resources from abroad, and promote the participation of civil society in the activities of the State (Mexico); 157.14 Take concrete steps to ensure the 2015 national elections are more representative and participative than those in 2010, especially around freedom of assembly, and encourage debate among political parties (United Kingdom); 157.15 Introduce minimum wage legislation reasonable enough to provide all workers and their families with a decent standard of living (Zambia); 157.16 Continue work on the development of the national education system, ensuring access to quality and free education (Belarus); 157.17 Consider implementing the pertinent recommendations of the Independent Expert on minority issues, with a view to guaranteeing equal treatment of all ethnic groups in the country (Cabo Verde); 157.18 Monitor the implementation of the anti-terrorism law in order to identify any act of repression which affects freedom of association and expression and possible cases of arbitrary detention. In addition, develop activities necessary to eliminate any excesses by the authorities in its application (Mexico). 158. Ethiopia considers that the recommendations below cannot be accepted and will thus be noted: 158.1 Consider ratification of those international instruments to which it is not yet a party (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 158.2 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, OPCAT, the Rome Statute and the UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education (Tunisia); 158.3 In line with the recommendations issued by the Committee against Torture and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, consider ratifying the First Optional Protocol to ICCPR and the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR aiming at the abolition of the death penalty; the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance; the Optional Protocol to CEDAW as well as the Optional Protocol to CAT, establishing national preventive mechanisms (Uruguay); 158.4 Abolish the death penalty and sign and ratify both Optional Protocols to ICCPR (Portugal); Abolish the death penalty and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Costa Rica); Abolish the death penalty by means of law and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (France); 158.5 Abolish the measures relating to the death penalty in the national legislation and additionally accede to the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Spain); 158.6 Intensify efforts in order to reach universal water coverage as well as signing and ratifying the Optional Protocol to the ICESCR (Portugal); 158.7 Sign and ratify OP-CAT (Denmark); 158.8 Ratify  OP-CAT (Estonia) (Togo); 158.9 Ratify OP-CAT and grant the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and other independent observers immediate, full and genuine access to all detention facilities (Hungary); 158.10 Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Uruguay); 158.11 Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court as well as the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (France); 158.12 Ratify the Rome Statute and the Optional Protocols to ICCPR and the Optional Protocol to ICESCR (Madagascar); 158.13 Ratify the Rome Statute and OPCAT (Paraguay); 158.14 Consider ratifying the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and ensure its implementation (Botswana); Accede to the Rome Statute and fully align its national legislation with the Statute (Latvia); 158.15 Accede to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and fully align its national legislation with the Rome Statute, including by incorporating provisions to cooperate promptly and fully with the Court and to investigate and prosecute genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes effectively before its national courts (Liechtenstein); 158.16 Accede to the Rome Statute and to the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the Court (Estonia); Accede to the Rome Statute and implement it fully at national level and accede to the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the Court as recommended in the first UPR cycle (Slovakia); 158.17 Further enhance the institutional and financial capacities of the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission to effectively carry out its mandate vis-à.vis the affected communities, especially its working relations with the Oromo, Ogaden, Gambella and Somali communities (Namibia); 158.18 Issue a standing invitation to all special procedures (Germany); Consider extending a standing invitation to all special procedures mandate holders of the Human Rights Council (Latvia); 158.19 Extend an open invitation to all the mechanisms and special procedures of the Human Rights Council (Uruguay); 158.20 Strengthen its cooperation with United Nations human rights mechanisms, including by extending a standing invitation to all thematic special procedures (Montenegro); 158.21 Respond favourably to all outstanding requests for visits by the special procedures and consider issuing a standing invitation to the special procedures, as recommended previously (Slovenia); 158.22 Permit the Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association to travel to Ethiopia to advise the Government (United States); 158.23 Amend the Penal Code to decriminalize homosexuality (Portugal); 158.24 Reform the Penal Code with the aim of decriminalizing homosexuality (France); 158.25 Extend measures to combat discrimination to the entire vulnerable population, which is victim of stereotypes and discrimination, particularly discrimination based on sexual orientation, and thus amend the criminalization established in the Penal Code relating to that sector of the population (Argentina); 158.26 Cognizant of the de facto moratorium on capital punishment, consider abolishing the death penalty (Namibia); 158.27 Positively consider adopting a de jure moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing the death penalty (Italy); 158.28 Transform the current practice of suspension of all executions into law, and put in place a “de jure” moratorium on executions (Belgium); 158.29 Take urgent measures to investigate the numerous reports of torture and extrajudicial executions committed by the Ethiopian National Defence Forces (Costa Rica); 158.30 Improve conditions in detention facilities by training personnel to investigate and prosecute all alleged cases of torture, and ratify OPCAT (Austria); 158.31 Authorize ICRC to visit all places where persons may be deprived of their liberty (Tunisia); 158.32 Immediately release all journalists detained for their professional activities, both those arrested recently and those jailed earlier, such as Mr. Nega and Ms. Alemu (Czech Republic); 158.33 Put an end to the harassment of journalists and release those detained without any valid grounds (Switzerland); 158.34 Amend the Mass Media Proclamation so that the space for free media is widened, and refrain from invoking the Anti-Terrorism Proclamation to stifle independent journalists (Czech Republic); 158.35 Repeal the provisions of the media and anti-terrorism legislation that infringe on the protection accorded to freedom of expression by provisions in article 29 of its Constitution and on Ethiopia’s human rights obligations (Slovenia); 158.36 Take necessary measures to ensure respect for the right to freedom of association, including by repealing legislative and administrative restrictions on the activities of NGOs (Slovakia); 158.37 Contribute to reinforcing the role of civil society and suppress the administrative constraints and financial restrictions imposed by the 2009 law (France); 158.38 Allow civil society organizations to complement government programmes in preventing violence and harmful practices against women and girls and also amend the Charities and Societies Proclamation to ensure that restrictions on freedom of association are removed, including restrictions on potential sources of funding for civil society (Ireland); 158.39 Amend the Charities and Societies Proclamation so that all NGOs can operate freely without restrictions stemming from the structure of their funding (Czech Republic); 158.40 Repeal the Charities and Societies Proclamation in order to promote the development of an independent civil society able to operate freely (United States); 158.41 Amend the Charities and Societies Proclamation to facilitate the effective operation and financing of NGOs (Australia); 158.42 Ensure that the provisions of the 2009 Charities and Societies Proclamation are in compliance with international human rights standards, including the freedom of expression and assembly (Austria); 158.43 Revise the Charities and Societies Proclamation and Anti-Terrorism Proclamation to create a framework conducive to the work of NGOs and other civil society organizations, and ensure the protection of journalists and political opponents from all forms of repression (Belgium); 158.44 Amend and clearly redefine provisions in the Charities and Societies Proclamation and the Anti-Terrorism Proclamation in order to lift restrictions on the rights to freedom of association and freedom of expression (Netherlands); 158.45 Amend the Charities and Societies Proclamation to allow civil society to work on human rights issues, including women’s rights, without restrictions related to the origin of funding (Norway); 158.46 Take measures to ensure full rights of association, by reviewing the Charities and Societies Proclamation as regards funding restrictions imposed on civil society organizations working with human rights (Sweden); 158.47 Ensure a safe and enabling environment for human rights defenders, including by loosening restrictions for fundraising activities of NGOs (Germany); 158.48 Ensure inclusive campaigning before the 2015 elections and grant all political parties equal access to the media (Czech Republic); 158.49 Create a conducive environment for independent civil society to conduct civic and voter education, monitor elections and organize election debates, by lifting all undue restrictions on activities and funding of NGOs (Hungary); 158.50 Narrow the definition of terrorist activity within international practice to exclude journalism (Australia); 158.51 Revise the 2009 Anti-Terrorism Proclamation and the 2008 Mass Media Proclamation, bringing them into line with international human rights standards (Austria); 158.52 Remove vague provisions in the Anti-Terrorism Proclamation that can be used to criminalize the exercise of the right to freedom of expression and association and ensure that criminal prosecutions do not limit the freedom of expression of civil society, opposition politicians and independent media (Sweden); 158.53 Conduct a full review of the Anti-Terrorism Proclamation, amending the law as necessary to ensure that it strengthens the rule of law and is applied apolitically and in full compliance with Ethiopia’s international human rights obligations (United States). 159. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English only]  Composition of the delegation  The delegation of Ethiopia Gebre-Christos, State Minister ofmembers:  was Foreign   headed Affairs, by and  H.E. composed  Ambass of ador  the  Berhane following  • H.E. Mr. Shemels Kemal Berhan, State Minister of Office of the Government Communication Affairs; • H.E. Mr. Leul Kahsay Woldu, State Minister of Justice; • H.E. Mr. Mulugeta Wuletaw Wedaje, State Minister of Federal Affairs; • H.E. Mrs. Firenesh Mekuria Gobena, State Minister of Women, Children and Youth Affairs; • H.E. Mr. Minelik Alemu Getahun, Ambassador Extraordinary and plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia to the United Nations Office at Geneva and other International Organisations in Switzerland; • Mr. Zadig Abreha Berhe, Deputy General Director, Office of National Council for the Construction of Grand Renaissance Dam; • Mr. Reta Alemu Nega, Director General of International Legal Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Lulit Zwedie Gebremariam, Minister Counsellor, Permanent Mission of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia to the United Nations Office and other International Organisations in Switzerland; • Mr.	 Azanaw Tadesse Abreha, Minister Counsellor, Permanent Mission of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia to the United Nations Office and other International Organisations in Switzerland; • Mr.	 Ephrem Bouzayhue Hidug, Minister Counsellor, Permanent Mission of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia to the United Nations Office and other International Organisations in Switzerland; • Mr.	 Girma Kassaye Ayehu, Minister Counsellor II, Permanent Mission of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia to the United Nations Office and other International Organisations in Switzerland; • Mr.	 Beyene Feseha Abay, Director of Religious Organisations and Associations, Ministry of Federal Affairs; • Mr. Dereje	 Tecgyebelu Habtemichael, Director of Legal Service, Ministry of Women, Children and Youth Affairs; • Mr. Tariku	 Tilahun Woldemariam, Acting Director of the Directorate of International Cooperation on Legal Affairs of the Ministry of Justice; • Mr. Redae Girmay Abraha, Counsellor	 I, Permanent Mission of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia to the United Nations Office and other International Organisations in Switzerland; • Mr. Leuleseged Tadese Abebe, Counsellor II, Permanent Mission of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia to the United Nations Office and other International Organisations in Switzerland; • Mr. Abebe Tesfaye Mircana, Senior Expert, Development Planning and Research Directorate, Ministry of Finance and Economic Development; • Mr. Gutulu Belachew 	Gujubo, Second Councillor, International Organizations Directorate-General, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Yanit Abera Habtemariam, Second Secretary, Permanent Mission of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia to the United Nations Office at Geneva and other International Organisations in Switzerland; • Mr. Besfat Gashaw Tebeje, Legal Officer, International Legal Affairs Directorate General, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Nurlgn	 Edris Gebril, Legal Officer, International Legal Affairs Directorate General, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Samuel Berhanu	 Woldemariam, Legal Officer, International Legal Affairs Directorate General, Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 