Distr.: General 16 December 2013 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-fifth session Agenda item 6  Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Nigeria * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.13-19010 *1319010* 
Contents  Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–133 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–27 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 28–133 6 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 134–139 14  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 27 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its seventeenth session from 21 October to 1 November 2013. The review of Nigeria was held at the 4th meeting, on 22 October 2013. The delegation was headed by Mohammed Bello Adoke. At its 10th meeting, held on 25 October 2013, the Working Group adopted the report on Nigeria. 2. On 14 January 2013, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Nigeria: Chile, Côte d’Ivoire and Malaysia. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Nigeria: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/17/NGA/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/17/NGA/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/17/NGA/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, the Czech Republic, Germany, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United States of America was transmitted to Nigeria through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR). I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation stated that Nigeria viewed the UPR as a mechanism for constructive engagement for the promotion and protection of human rights. In preparing its national report, the Government of Nigeria had constituted an all-inclusive national committee made up of government officials and representatives of civil society, and, inter alia, had conducted extensive consultations with relevant stakeholders. 6. Since the first review in 2009, significant developments had been recorded. Nigeria had largely fulfilled its commitments to the Human Rights Council through its active participation in the work and activities of the Council, its support for the National Human Rights Commission, its commitment to human rights instruments, and its support for all strategies at regional and international levels to promote and protect human rights. 7. Nigeria had also fulfilled its commitments by amending the National Human Rights Commission Act in 2010, granting the Commission operational and financial independence, and enhancing its investigative and enforcement powers. Nigeria had acceded to several international human rights instruments. The Constitution was amended to grant financial autonomy to the Independent National Electoral Commission, which contributed significantly to making the 2011 general elections in Nigeria free, fair and credible. In addition, section 254 of the Constitution was amended to provide for the establishment of a national industrial court. 8. The Government had maintained a rights-based approach to economic management which was pro-poor and gender-sensitive, and which was reflected in the economic transformation blueprint tagged Nigeria Vision 20:2020. 9. The Government was committed to improving access to affordable housing through legal and policy frameworks, which had increased the number of prototype housing units constructed by 151.17 per cent between 2011 and 2012. 10. The Federal Justice Sector Reform Coordinating Committee had been mandated to coordinate the development, management and implementation of policies aimed, inter alia, at improving the delivery of justice services. Furthermore, an Administration of Criminal Justice Bill was before the National Assembly. That bill was intended to institutionalize the broad objective of the proposed national prosecution policy. 11. Terrorism and violent insurgency had posed existential threats. Those threats, which were externally induced, had manifested themselves in activities by militant insurgents and organized crime groups who had committed atrocities, crimes against humanity and violations of human rights. In order to address the problem, constitutional measures had been adopted that included the declaration of a state of emergency in the States of Adamawa, Borno and Yobe in north-east Nigeria, where the insurgents had their base and carried out their attacks. A joint task force and a special task force had been deployed, with the required legislative authorization to utilize rights-based rules of engagement and operational plans in combating the insurgency. The Government had established a committee on dialogue and reconciliation that aimed to provide incentives to dissuade terrorists and other extremists from violence. 12. Significant efforts had been made to implement the accepted recommendations, and the efforts made in that regard constituted a substantial part of Nigeria’s national report. 13. Responding to the questions prepared in advance, the delegation emphasized that torture, as a means of extracting information from suspects, had no place in law enforcement. The police had been retrained and were now relying on modern and scientific means of interrogation. Police officers found to have committed extrajudicial executions were usually dismissed from service and prosecuted in accordance with the law. 14. The demolition of illegal structures in various parts of the country had been embarked upon in the public interest. The affected structures were those that had been erected without the permission of the relevant authorities and that were therefore not in conformity with the master plan for those areas. Experts had warned that the continuing existence of those illegal structures posed a danger, not only to the lives of the inhabitants of such areas, but also to the ecosystem. The authorities had carried out verification exercises to ensure that those who had genuine claims were either compensated, or were relocated to other areas and provided with alternative shelter. 15. With regard to what was being done to ensure that the fight against terrorism was carried out in accordance with international standards, the delegation stated that despite the difficult circumstances generated by terrorism, the country’s law enforcement agencies had been instructed to observe human rights while countering acts of terror. 16. The issue of sexual orientation did not enjoy consensus within the United Nations human rights system, and all attempts to integrate sexual orientation into existing universally recognized human rights had so far failed. The overwhelming majority of Nigerians objected to same-sex relationships, on the basis of their deeply held religious, cultural and moral beliefs, against which no government could successfully legislate. There was no policy or practice of witch-hunting people on the basis of their sexual orientation. 17. Nigeria was mindful of the need to protect the rights of women, as well as of disadvantaged groups such as orphans, widows, the disabled, mentally incapacitated persons, the elderly and the sick. In that context, Nigeria had signed and ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). In an effort to entrench affirmative action for women, 13 female ministers out of a total of 42 ministers, accounting for 33.3 per cent, as well as 4 female special advisers out of a total 18, accounting for 22 per cent, had been appointed. Furthermore, the Gender and Equal Opportunities Bill had passed its second reading in the National Assembly. The bill aimed to incorporate into Nigeria’s domestic law the provisions of CEDAW and of the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa. 18. The death penalty still existed on the statute books. Laws could only be changed through negotiation and persuasion and not by government fiat. Regarding the executions carried out in June 2013, due process had been followed and the executions had been carried out in accordance with the provisions of Nigeria’s laws. 19. In addition to the constitutional provisions protecting the rights of minorities, the creation of States had contributed to the efforts to give the different ethnic groups in Nigeria more political control over their affairs. Also, the federal character principle had enabled people from all parts of the country to receive fair and equal allocation of public goods, social services and amenities. 20. The development of the child was at the centre of Nigeria’s development priorities. Adequate laws and policies were in place to protect children against all forms of violence. 21. The National Agency for the Prohibition of Traffic in Persons and other Related Matters had been established with a mandate to combat human trafficking occuring within and across Nigeria’s borders. In addition, a national policy had been adopted on protection and assistance for trafficked persons, in line with internationally accepted standards and best practices. 22. In response to a question on preventing election violence, the delegation stated that the granting of financial autonomy to the Independent National Electoral Commission had enabled it to perform optimally, as well as enhancing electoral processes. Also, the Constitution had been specifically amended in order to set timelines for the determination of election petitions. The amendment mandated an election tribunal to deliver its judgement in writing within 180 days of an election petition being filed. Similarly, an appeal from the decision of an election tribunal or court must be determined within 60 days of the date of judgement. The outcome of that amendment had been the speedy determination of election petitions, and the avoidance of unnecessary distractions to governance often occasioned by delays in determining election petitions. The delegation noted that when the electorate believed in the credibility and fairness of the election process, violence could be prevented. 23. While the Government was yet to extend a standing invitation to special procedures, Nigeria had had longstanding cooperation with that vital mechanism of the Human Rights Council. Requests for visits by a number of special procedures mandate holders had been considered, and Nigeria had agreed to receive the Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers; the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences; the Representative of the Secretary-General on internally displaced persons; the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and children; and the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide. The requests by the Independent Expert on minority issues, and by the Special Rapporteur on adequate housing as a component of the right to an adequate standard of living, and on the right to non-discrimination in this context, were being processed. It was stated that, as a matter of principle, Nigeria had never been averse to visits by special procedures mandate holders to Nigeria, and had never rejected any requests to visit. 24. In order to enhance treaty reporting obligations, the Inter-Ministerial National Working Group on Human Rights Treaty Reporting had been established, in July 2010.  25. The Government was committed to building a society with equal access to justice for all, irrespective of means, and where all constitutional rights were respected, protected and defended. Through the services of the Legal Aid Council, a number of initiatives had been introduced, including the enactment of the Legal Aid Act 2011 which had broadened the scope of the mandate of the Legal Aid Council, empowering it to utilize paralegals for service delivery at the grass-roots level. The Police Duty-Solicitor Scheme was an example of providing prompt and effective representation to suspects. 26. The press was free, and it was that freedom that enabled the press to criticize government policies without any consequences. The role of the press in national development was recognized, and it was noted that in 2012 the Freedom of Information Act had been passed. 27. Given that Nigeria hosted several multinational corporations, and consistent with its obligations as a responsible member of the international community, Nigeria had not only taken measures to protect business enterprises and their personnel, but had also ensured that they respected human rights in carrying out their operations. In addition, Nigeria, together with other countries, had sponsored the initiative on human rights and transnational corporations and other business enterprises, which had culminated in the adoption of the United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 28. During the interactive dialogue, 94 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 29. Viet Nam commended the human rights infrastructure and specific measures adopted. It noted that challenges remained, and encouraged the international community to provide assistance. It made a recommendation. 30. Yemen noted that Nigeria had ratified several international human rights instruments, such as the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (OP-CAT), and praised the progress made by the Government. Yemen made recommendations. 31. Algeria noted Nigeria’s commitment to human rights, demonstrated by its economic plans, and praised the strengthening of democracy. It urged the international community to support Nigeria with technical assistance. Algeria made recommendations. 32. Angola noted the implementation of recommendations made at the first UPR and commended the establishment of bodies concerning torture and women’s economic empowerment. Angola made a recommendation. 33. Argentina commended the ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CPED), and the measures taken to promote religious harmony and dialogue between religious leaders, and to combat discrimination. Argentina made recommendations. 34. Australia praised the strengthening of the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC). It was concerned by executions that had taken place, reports of extrajudicial killings, and discrimination against minority groups. Australia made recommendations. 35. Austria commended Nigeria’s human rights legislation, but noted challenges in the penitentiary system. It noted concerns surrounding the Anti-Same-Sex Marriage Bill, the death penalty and female genital mutilation (FGM). Austria made recommendations. 36. Azerbaijan praised the human rights measures adopted in Nigeria, including cooperation with special procedures mandate holders, and emphasized that Nigeria’s security challenges were caused by external factors. Azerbaijan made recommendations. 37. Bangladesh commended the progress made by Nigeria, particularly in education and health. It recognized Nigeria’s efforts to address the HIV/AIDS epidemic. Bangladesh made a recommendation. 38. Belgium praised the strengthening of the NHRC, and press freedom, but was concerned by torture in detention centres and failures concerning the Child Rights Act. Belgium made recommendations. 39. Benin noted with satisfaction the rights-based economic development plan, the judicial reforms and the measures addressing security issues. It urged Nigeria to continue adopting human rights measures. Benin made recommendations. 40. Botswana commended measures taken by Nigeria, including strengthening the NHRC, acceding to human rights instruments, combating religious intolerance and addressing HIV/AIDS. Challenges remained, for example with regard to orphaned children. Botswana made recommendations. 41. Brazil praised the ratification of human rights instruments and the establishment of the Federal Ministry of Women Affairs and Social Development. It noted challenges, including FGM and early marriage. Brazil made recommendations. 42. Bulgaria noted concerns regarding the low rate of enrolment of young children in schools, geographical disparities in education, and Nigeria’s failure to extend an invitation to the special procedures. Bulgaria made recommendations. 43. Burkina Faso commended several measures, including the steps taken to raise awareness of harmful cultural practices. It urged the international community to support Nigeria. It made a recommendation. 44. Cambodia welcomed the strengthening of the NHRC; Nigeria Vision 20:2020, which promoted human rights; and the accession to several international instruments. Cambodia made recommendations. 45. Canada asked what action would be taken to enforce laws to protect the right to religious freedom. It recognized the difficulties in combating terrorism, and welcomed the strengthening of the NHRC. Canada made recommendations. 46. Cape Verde noted that Nigeria had a range of legislative and institutional human rights provisions, and encouraged the swift adoption of human rights bills. It made recommendations. 47. Chad commended the collaborative approach taken when drafting the report. It noted that Nigeria was party to several international instruments and had made voluntary commitments. It made a recommendation. 48. China commended the Nigeria Vision 20:2020 economic and social development programme, and efforts to eliminate violence against women. It highlighted progress made in primary education, health care and protecting children’s rights. China made recommendations. 49. The Congo commended the amendment of the Constitution to grant financial autonomy to the Independent National Electoral Commission, the adoption of judicial reforms and the organization of training seminars to raise the security forces’ awareness of human rights. 50. Costa Rica noted Nigeria’s accession to human rights instruments, and the economic policy defined in Nigeria Vision 20:2020. It encouraged a de facto moratorium on the death penalty, as well as its possible abolition. It made recommendations. 51. Côte d’Ivoire commended the constitutional review process to ensure the independence of national institutions. It noted Nigeria’s determination to promote good governance, and its ratification of several human rights instruments. It made recommendations. 52. Cuba noted Nigeria’s measures to guarantee the right to a sustainable environment. It commended efforts to guarantee gender equality and to protect children from violence. It made recommendations. 53. The Czech Republic welcomed ratification of OP-CAT, but expressed concern over reports on the use of torture. It acknowledged serious security challenges facing Nigeria, and made recommendations. 54. The Democratic Republic of the Congo highlighted constitutional amendments to strengthen the democratic process, judicial reforms, and economic projects in several sectors. It commended sustainable development initiatives, and made recommendations. 55. Djibouti commended Nigeria’s active participation in the Human Rights Council, and welcomed its efforts to improve the socioeconomic situation through the Nigeria Vision 20:2020 programme for peace, stability and well-being. It made recommendations.  56. Ecuador highlighted the strengthening of the NHRC, and Nigeria’s accession to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) and other vital human rights instruments. It made recommendations. 57. Egypt commended Nigeria’s firmly established culture of respect for human rights, demonstrated by the strengthening of the NHRC, and by the amendments to the 1999 Constitution. It made recommendations.  58. Estonia encouraged further promotion of the rights of freedom of expression, assembly and association. It expressed concern about the lifting of the moratorium on the death penalty. It made recommendations. 59. Ethiopia noted Nigeria’s determination to strengthen the democratic system. It commended the improved access to housing, the judicial reforms and the fight against terrorism. It made a recommendation. 60. Finland acknowledged and encouraged Nigeria’s efforts to combat trafficking in human beings. It invited Nigeria to address the needs and rights of children; this included addressing the stigmatization of children as witches. It made recommendations.  61. France commended the efforts made by Nigeria since the first UPR, and made recommendations.  62. Gabon encouraged Nigeria to continue its measures to discourage acts of violence, and called for support from the Council and the international community. It made a recommendation. 63. Germany remained concerned about reports of torture, extrajudicial killings and other human rights violations by the armed forces. It made recommendations.  64. Ghana acknowledged the need to address security and terrorism issues, and supported Nigeria’s request for technical assistance. It commended progress in deepening a culture of human rights. It made recommendations. 65. The Holy See acknowledged the efforts to combat violence against Christians and other minority groups. It made recommendations. 66. Hungary appreciated Nigeria’s efforts to strengthen democratic processes, and its ratification of several international human rights instruments. It raised concerns about reported cases of torture in police custody. It made recommendations. 67. Indonesia commended Nigeria on its Vision 20:2020 initiative. It observed that its promotion and protection of human rights could be even further enhanced. It made recommendations. 68. Iraq welcomed Nigeria’s accession to a number of instruments, including OP-CAT and the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (CPPCG). It made a recommendation. 69. The delegation stated that Nigeria did not accept the recommendations on same-sex marriage because it conflicted with national and cultural values. A poll conducted in 2011 had indicated that 92 per cent of the people were against same-sex marriage. 70. The delegation noted that religious freedom was guaranteed in the Constitution. In addition, it stated that instances of extrajudicial killings brought to the attention of the Government had been well addressed. 71. On the issue of early marriages, the delegation stated that the Child Rights Act was in place. Efforts had been made to sensitize the States about this act in order to achieve its uniform application. 72. The Government was doing much to address prison overcrowding, including amending the Legal Aid Council Bill, and introducing suspended sentences for crimes that were not too serious. The Justice Sector Bill before the National Assembly was meant to address part of the problem. 73. Robust legislation had been passed to eradicate corruption. In addition, there was the Independent Corrupt Practices and Other Related Offences Commission. 74. A national agency for the prohibition of trafficking in persons was in place. A bill to address this issue had passed its second reading and was expected to be passed into law soon. Anti-trafficking laws and policies were human rights-based, and did not criminalize victims. 75. The delegation stated that a child labour policy had been adopted which strengthened the response to child labour and ensured effective implementation of the Child Rights Act. The delegation highlighted the education schemes being run in different parts of the country that targeted girls. It noted that harmful practices had been criminalized, and that practitioners faced criminal charges. 76. Ireland was concerned by reports of widespread torture and ill-treatment in Nigerian police custody, human rights violations by both Boko Haram and security forces, FGM, and impunity for domestic and sexual violence. It made recommendations. 77. Italy appreciated Nigeria’s efforts to promote and protect human rights, especially those of women and children, while regretting the recent executions in Edo State. It made recommendations. 78. Japan expressed concern about the security and human rights situation in Nigeria, which was marked by extrajudicial killings, enforced disappearances and torture. It appreciated Nigeria’s commitment to promoting women’s rights, despite the widespread practice of FGM. It made recommendations. 79. Kenya noted Nigeria’s legislative and constitutional reforms, its mainstreaming of human rights into national planning, and its accessions to additional human rights instruments and regional instruments. It made a recommendation. 80. Lebanon noted that Nigeria had acceded to a number of international human rights instruments. It made recommendations. 81. Lesotho noted Nigeria’s efforts to strengthen its institutional framework, which included empowering the courts to apply the human rights provisions of the Constitution and of the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights. It made recommendations. 82. Libya noted that Nigeria was attempting to implement the recommendations from the first UPR cycle, especially with respect to persons with disabilities, enforced disappearances, and OP-CAT. 83. Malaysia noted that Nigeria Vision 20:2020 aimed to eradicate poverty, to improve access to health care, drinking water, sanitation and affordable housing, to build human capacity for sustainable living, to promote gender equality and to empower women. It made recommendations. 84. Maldives noted the Government’s efforts to strengthen and protect children’s rights and to promote female entrepreneurship. It made recommendations. 85. Mauritania valued the measures that Nigeria had adopted to combat all forms of violence against women and children, in line with its international commitments, including, in particular, implementing the provisions of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT). 86. Mexico appreciated the efforts made by Nigeria, especially the exchanging of best practices on dealing with citizens’ complaints through the NHRC. It urged Nigeria to take further action to abolish the death penalty. It made recommendations. 87. Montenegro asked whether the de facto moratorium on the death penalty would be reinstated. It appreciated the appointment of a special rapporteur on children’s rights within the NHRC, and asked what measures would be taken to promote and protect children’s rights and prohibit early marriages. It made recommendations. 88. Morocco asked what measures would be taken to improve judicial administration. It congratulated Nigeria on its Vision 20:2020 blueprint, and asked what measures were envisaged to integrate human rights into the post-2015 development agenda.  89. Mozambique commended Nigeria on acceding to various human rights instruments, on strengthening its human rights institutions, and on its commitment to ensuring respect for human rights for all. It encouraged Nigeria to pursue implementation of Vision 20:2020. 90. The Netherlands complimented Nigeria on its prohibition of violence against, and trafficking of, women and girls, and the practice of FGM, and on its engagement with traditional and religious leaders on the latter issue. Nevertheless, it observed that FGM remained widespread. It made recommendations. 91. Nicaragua highlighted Nigeria’s accession to new international human rights instruments and the resulting legislative and institutional reforms. It encouraged the Government to work towards guiding the country along the path of peace, reconciliation and fraternal dialogue. It made a recommendation. 92. The Niger commended Nigeria on strengthening its legal and institutional framework and ratifying several conventions. It observed that Nigeria Vision 20:2020 represented a framework for promoting fundamental rights. It made recommendations.  93. Norway noted that, while impressive, Nigeria’s economic growth had not contributed to poverty reduction. It regretted the prevalence of terrorism and acts of cruelty, widespread impunity, and recent executions. Norway made recommendations. 94. Oman acknowledged Nigeria’s commitment to improve housing and urban planning, and noted that socio-economic development was enshrined in the Constitution. It welcomed efforts to raise awareness of human rights. Oman made recommendations. 95. Paraguay welcomed Nigeria’s accession to international instruments, improved access to health services, and efforts to empower women. Paraguay offered technical support regarding human rights indicators. Paraguay made recommendations.  96. The Philippines commended the amendments to the National Human Rights Commission Act, and the ratification of several international instruments since the last UPR. It welcomed the prioritization of women’s and girls’ rights. The Philippines made recommendations. 97. Poland expressed concern about violence against children, including prostitution and sexual abuse, and about giving death sentences or life sentences to minors. Poland made recommendations. 98. Portugal, commending the ratification of OP-CAT and reiterating its previous recommendation regarding the use of torture by security forces, remained concerned about such practices. Portugal regretted the executions carried out in 2013. Portugal made recommendations. 99. The Republic of Korea highlighted the strengthened independence of the NHRC. It welcomed Nigeria’s efforts to accede to international conventions, which it hoped would be enshrined in law. It made recommendations. 100. The Republic of Moldova encouraged Nigeria to enact ratified international treaties in domestic legislation and fulfil reporting obligations, and to use the strengthened institutional framework to prioritize and implement human rights activities. It made recommendations. 101. The Russian Federation welcomed the development of legislation, and the approval by the Federal Executive Council of the National Action Plan for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights. It made recommendations. 102. Rwanda commended the financial autonomy of the Independent National Electoral Commission, and the measures taken to improve internal security. It noted the ratification of United Nations instruments, particularly CPPCG, and the establishment of laws to protect children from violence. Rwanda made recommendations. 103. Saudi Arabia welcomed Nigeria’s accession to various international instruments, including CPPCG and CRPD. It encouraged Nigeria to continue efforts to improve the human rights situation in the country. It made a recommendation. 104. Senegal acknowledged Nigeria’s accession to international instruments, and the strengthening of the NHRC. It noted that efforts should continue, in order to address the rights of vulnerable people and issues of gender equality. Senegal made recommendations. 105. Serbia welcomed Nigeria’s ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (OP-CRC-SC) and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict (OP-CRC-AC), and its implementation of ratified instruments. Serbia encouraged the development of a sustainable national policy on internally displaced persons. It made a recommendation. 106 Sierra Leone noted that Nigeria had acceded to CRPD, CPED, CPPCG and OP-CAT, and had ratified several regional human rights instruments including the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance. It made recommendations. 107. Singapore acknowledged Nigeria’s strengthened framework for women’s rights. It recognized the improved access to health care, reduced maternal and child mortality, and increased health-related funding. Singapore made recommendations. 108. Slovakia remained concerned about executions, particularly in the case of minors. It noted that access to education should be improved, and asked about the measures envisaged to promote girls’ enrolment in schools. Slovakia made recommendations. 109. Slovenia commended the ratification of the OP-CRC-AC and OP-CRC-SC, the appointment of a national special rapporteur on children’s rights, and the enactment of legislation on children’s rights. It expressed concern about violence against children and women, and about FGM. Slovenia made recommendations. 110. South Africa noted Nigeria’s investment in education to reduce illiteracy and promote qualitative education. It called on the international community to provide technical assistance as requested. It made a recommendation. 111. South Sudan, noting the measures taken to improve internal security, expressed concern about the current security challenges. It encouraged Nigeria to remain committed to unity in diversity. It made a recommendation. 112. Spain expressed concern about the Anti-Same-Sex Marriage Bill, and asked how Nigeria would guarantee such rights, since they were recognized in the Constitution. It made recommendations. 113. The State of Palestine encouraged Nigeria to incorporate CEDAW into its national law. It urged the NHRC to ensure compliance with the Paris Principles. It made recommendations. 114. The Sudan commended Nigeria on its efforts since its first UPR in 2009 to promote human rights, and on its accession to international and regional human rights instruments. It made recommendations. 115. Sweden, referring to the execution of four prisoners in Edo State, asked why the de facto moratorium on the death penalty had been broken and whether there were plans to reinstate it. It made recommendations. 116. Switzerland applauded the efforts made by the Government since its first UPR. It made recommendations. 117. Thailand commended Nigeria’s comprehensive and inclusive approach to dealing with the violent Boko Haram insurgency. It welcomed the initiative to ensure access to quality health care and recognized the efforts to guarantee a sustainable environment. It made recommendations. 118. Togo commended the priority given to combating violence against women. It made recommendations. 119. Tunisia encouraged the Government to abolish any form of corporal punishment used against children. It urged the international community to respond to Nigeria’s request for technical assistance. It made recommendations. 120. Turkey requested an update on the latest situation regarding the declaration of a state of emergency in three north-eastern states owing to the terrorist activities of Boko Haram and Ansaru. It made recommendations. 121. Turkmenistan applauded the Government’s accession between 2009 and 2013 to several core human rights instruments, and noted the measures taken to improve access to affordable housing. It made recommendations. 122. Uganda noted the rights-based, pro-poor and gender-sensitive approach to economic management in Nigeria Vision 20:2020. In addition, it noted the amendment to the National Human Rights Commission Act, and Nigeria’s accession to several international human rights instruments. It made a recommendation. 123. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland expressed concern about allegations of torture and extrajudicial killings by elements of the Nigerian security forces, and called for investigations into the reports of human rights abuses by those forces. It made recommendations. 124. The United Republic of Tanzania noted the positive results achieved in Nigeria’s school enrolment programme. It encouraged Nigeria to strengthen educational support for vulnerable children, and to intensify its search for lasting peace in the north-eastern regions of the country. 125. The United States of America condemned the attacks by insurgents and was concerned about reports of human rights violations by security forces. Nigeria’s statement that lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) persons were not visible in Nigeria was disappointing. It made recommendations. 126. Uruguay highlighted Nigeria’s alignment of domestic law with international human rights standards, which had been achieved through the ratification of seven core international human rights treaties and strengthening of the NHRC. It made recommendations. 127. Uzbekistan noted that Nigeria had acceded to international instruments for protection of the rights of children and persons with disabilities, and for protection against torture, genocide and enforced disappearance. It viewed positively Nigeria’s judicial, electoral, and gender equality-based reforms. It made recommendations. 128. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela acknowledged Nigeria’s efforts to accede to core international human rights instruments, and the amendment to the law, which had enabled the NHRC to regain its ‘A’ status. It made recommendations.  129. Sri Lanka welcomed Nigeria’s accession to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, and to OP-CRC-SC and OP-CRC-AC. In addition, it welcomed the efforts to address security challenges, as well as the efforts to provide human rights education to the police and the military. It made recommendations. 130. Regarding the death penalty, the delegation reiterated that the moratorium was the most important issue, but that in a federal system, State governments had a measure of autonomy. However, efforts would continue to be made to amend the Constitution. 131. The delegation stated that the Government had an effective policy to improve universal access to health care. Regarding the environment, measures had been taken within the judicial reform system to ensure sustainable environment. 132. Regarding invitations to mandate holders, the delegation stated that Nigeria offered an invitation at any time. With regard to the security situation, the delegation referred to the state of emergency in three states and said that military personnel exceeding the rules of engagement would be held accountable. The delegation explained that efforts were being made to protect the rights of those detained, and that directives had been given to provide access for the Red Cross. Regarding child labour, the delegation specified that Nigeria prohibited the use of child labour. On harmful cultural practices, the delegation said that some states had passed laws prohibiting those practices. 133. Regarding human rights violations by security forces, the delegation stated that the police force had received training on human rights. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations** 134. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue and listed below have been examined by Nigeria. 135. The following recommendations enjoy the support of Nigeria: 135.1. Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the ICESCR and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Portugal); 135.2. Continue the process of ratifying those human rights instruments to which Nigeria is not yet a State party (Benin); 135.3. Step up its efforts in pursuing the ratification of other relevant international human rights instruments (Philippines); 135.4. Consider ratifying the outstanding human rights instruments and further update domestic laws to be in line with those articles (Lesotho); 135.5. Continue the process of ratifying international human rights instruments that it is not yet a party to (Burkina Faso); 135.6. Consider the ratification of International Labour Organization Convention No. 169 (Mexico); 135.7. Ensure the enactment of the bill on the Convention on Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) (Brazil); 135.8. Incorporate in national legislation the international human rights legal instruments to which Nigeria has acceded (Burkina Faso); 135.9. Reinforce anti-corruption laws (Côte d’Ivoire); 135.10. Bring its national legislation fully in line with the Rome Statute and to ratify the Agreement on Privileges and Immunities (Estonia); 135.11. Redouble efforts in harmonization of the legal system of the country (Ethiopia); 135.12. Take further measures to implement the 2010 recommendations by the Committee on the Rights of the Child, especially related to the domestication of the CRC; the right of the child to education, nutrition and health, and protecting girls from early marriage (Finland); 135.13. Adopt legislative and practical measures to combat accusations against children for witchcraft by, inter alia, criminalizing the witchcraft accusations, providing protection to children; and by awareness-raising, including in cooperation with civil society (Finland); 135.14. Ensure international conventions are streamlined in domestic laws (France); 135.15. Incorporate into municipal law various instruments such as the Optional Protocol on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Ghana); 135.16. Speed up the process of adopting laws that coincide with treaties that Nigeria has recently ratified (Iraq); ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 135.17. Enact these treaties (international instruments Nigeria ratified) into its domestic legislation (Hungary); 135.18. Continue strengthening the legal framework, including by fully implementing the ratified international human rights instruments, including CEDAW and CRPD (Indonesia); 135.19. Fully domesticate the human rights instruments which were recently acceded to with the aim of fully and effectively implementing them (Kenya); 135.20. Enact national legislation to translate the ratified international treaties into national law (Sierra Leone); 135.21. Introduce laws against female genital mutilation in all states, takes steps to ensure access to justice for women who are victims of violence; and that the Violence Against Persons (Prohibition) Bill is passed by the Senate (Ireland); 135.22. Continue working to harmonize its normative framework with obligations of international instruments recently adhered to (Nicaragua); 135.23. Adopt the necessary legislative and administrative measures to implement those treaties that they have already ratified (Niger); 135.24. Accelerate the adoption and full implementation at the federal, state and local levels of the Gender and Equal Opportunities Bill, and the Violence against Persons Prohibition Bill, in compliance with CEDAW provisions (Republic of Moldova); 135.25. Continue to work to include the norms of the Convention for the Elimination of Discrimination against Women in domestic law (Russian Federation); 135.26. Continue to strengthen the regime for the protection of the rights of the child in accordance with the obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Russian Federation); 135.27. Adopt and implement a law that will integrate the provisions of the African Union Convention for the protection and assistance of Displaced Persons in Africa at the national level (Switzerland); 135.28. Take appropriate measures to translate its international obligations into its national laws and regulations to ensure their effective implementation (Thailand); 135.29. Incorporate the international instruments that Nigeria has ratified in its national legislation (Togo); 135.30. Works towards the rapid inclusion within its national legislation of the provisions of recently ratified instruments including the Rome Statue (Tunisia); 135.31. Enact effective legislative regulations that will apply the economic transformation blueprint into the daily life of the society (Turkey); 135.32. Continue its measures with a view of strengthening the investigative and enforcement powers of the Human Rights Commission (Azerbaijan); 135.33. Continue to strengthen its [Nigeria’s] human rights institutions and develop further measures to ensure the effective implementation of their mandate (Lesotho); 135.34. Ensure operation of the national preventive mechanism, particularly by allowing the National Human Rights Commission unhindered access to all detention facilities (Belgium); 135.35. Continue its ongoing cooperation with the international human rights system of the United Nations (Azerbaijan); 135.36. Further strengthen their cooperation with the treaty bodies of the United Nations (Niger); 135.37. Make sure that the periodic reports to the United Nations treaties bodies that are overdue are submitted without further delay (Chad); 135.38. Keep its commitment to uphold human rights treaty obligations and engage constructively with human rights mechanisms (Ghana); 135.39. Extend a standing invitation to the human rights mechanisms of the United Nations (Costa Rica); 135.40. Continue the follow-up on the request by a number of Special Procedures Mandate Holders to visit the country (Bulgaria); 135.41. Issue standing invitation for the UN human rights special procedures and accept all requested visits by mandate holders (Hungary); 135.42. To keep on exerting efforts to protect and promote human rights (Yemen); 135.43. Continue efforts already embarked upon to ensure protection and promotion of all human rights (Djibouti); 135.44. Implement the 2011 EU Observation Mission recommendations concerning the equal political participation such as to provide assistance to IDPs or to prosecute people involved in election violence (Czech Republic); 135.45. Undertake measures, including through human rights education and training, to modify traditional practices that are in conflict with human rights standards which guarantee equality between men and women (Costa Rica); 135.46. Step up efforts aimed at eliminating harmful cultural practices, which hamper the full respect for the human rights of women (Paraguay); 135.47. The national report makes it clear that harmful traditional practices are deeply rooted in the culture of the Nigerian peoples; we therefore encourage the Nigerian government to intensify its efforts in the field of human rights education to eradicate this problem that only seems to weaken the development prospects in this country (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 135.48. Ensure that training of all military and security personnel does include a human rights component and that respect and protection of human rights during service is ensured and monitored (Germany); 135.49. Launch campaigns of sensitization for families and communities with the aim of creating areas of protection for the protection of the rights of children with greater efficiency (Mexico); 135.50. Continue measure to provide human rights trainings and capacity-building to civil servants and law-enforcement officials in line with the world programme for human Rights Education (Republic of Moldova); 135.51. Further develop the educational sector and the health sector because they are the key sectors in the development process (Saudi Arabia); 135.52. Ensure achieving more development in executing cases analysis programmes regarding child rights cases and cooperation with the civil society (Sudan); 135.53. Promote progress towards the promotion and protection of human rights (Uganda); 135.54. Intensify efforts towards strengthening inter-confessional harmony and a culture of human rights in the country (Uzbekistan); 135.55. Continue to enhance gender equality and the empowerment of women (Singapore); 135.56. Fully implement its national action plan on the UN Security Council resolution 1325 to meaningfully involve women in peace process and to combat gender-based violence and discrimination (Estonia); 135.57. Continue its positive approach in improving the socio-economic conditions of women, including intensifying support for women political aspirants through its Women Political Trust Fund (Malaysia); 135.58. Intensify efforts to improve the status of women and girls, including enhanced reproductive health measures, the fight against sexual and gender-based violence and harmful traditional practices, the domestication of the CEDAW Convention and to include women in decision-making at all levels (Norway); 135.59. Continue serious existing efforts to improve socio-economic status of women (Lebanon); 135.60. Continue to take vigorous measures including improving relevant laws to further promote gender equality (China); 135.61. Further raise public awareness on the equal rights of women, persons with disabilities and religious minorities for social integration and harmony (Cambodia); 135.62. Continue its efforts to bring about gender equality and empowerment of women (Algeria); 135.63. Intensify efforts in guaranteeing women’s rights, including by allocating adequate resources in order to strengthen the implementation of CEDAW convention (Angola); 135.64. Step up actions to tackle violence and discrimination against women (Benin); 135.65. Continue its positive engagement towards elimination of discrimination against women (Rwanda); 135.66. Continue with the efforts aimed at tackling discrimination and religious intolerance (Argentina); 135.67. Continue putting in place measures to prevent and eliminate racism as well as religious intolerance and hatred (Botswana); 135.68. Take all necessary measures to put an end to extrajudicial killings, investigate all reported cases, and ensure that all suspected perpetrators are brought to justice (Sweden); 135.69. Continue the development and implementation of measures aimed at reducing human rights violations by the security forces in particular extrajudicial executions, arbitrary detention and torture, as well as making the mechanisms of tackling impunity more effective (Switzerland); 135.70. Investigate all reports of extrajudicial killings in an independent and transparent manner and commit to bring to justice members of the security forces found to have been involved in such violations (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 135.71. Hold security forces accountable for human rights violations and establish a system for human rights monitoring and to promote accountability for gross violations of human rights (United States of America); 135.72. Take all necessary measures to prevent extrajudicial executions and torture by security forces by providing targeted training and capacity-building to law enforcement officials and military members (Canada); 135.73. Criminalize torture and establish an independent monitoring system of detention places (Hungary); 135.74. Ensure that future measures addressing torture and ill-treatment of detainees, including rehabilitation of victims and a revision of the mental health law are in full compliance with international standards (Sweden); 135.75. Strengthen the human rights training of state security forces and prevent the use of excessive force against civilians (Czech Republic); 135.76. Continue its successful and productive measures to counter and eliminate threats of militant insurgents and organized crime groups (Azerbaijan); 135.77. Strengthen measures aimed at improving security in the whole country notably in response to the activities of terrorist groups in the country (Côte d’Ivoire); 135.78. Intensify efforts against organized crime, including terrorism, and impunity of perpetrators (Norway); 135.79. Adopt a comprehensive approach to the security situation which ensures that the perpetrators of violence are brought to justice and that the security forces’ rules of engagement take full account of due process and human rights (Ireland); 135.80. Take further steps to restore security with due consideration to the rule of law and human rights (Japan); 135.81. You cannot have inclusive development without peace, given the terrorism situation we call upon the Nigerian government to continue with all efforts to deal with domestic insecurity in the country (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 135.82. Block acts of violence against religious minorities (Cape Verde); 135.83. Intensify its efforts, through legislation and practical measures, to promote and protect the rights of children against all forms of violence (Montenegro); 135.84. Take all the necessary measures at federal, state and local levels to prevent and eliminate all harmful practices against children (Slovenia); 135.85. Strengthen laws and policies for effective implementation to end violence against children and ensure the full implementation of the 2003 Child Rights Act (Maldives); 135.86. Introduce appropriate legal measures prohibiting all forms of violence against children, ensure accountability and end impunity (Poland); 135.87. Strengthen efforts to eliminate exploitative child labour (Sri Lanka); 135.88. Further implement concrete measures and policies to combat trafficking of children and child labour in the country (Cambodia); 135.89. Ensure more effective protection of children and better promotion of their well-being in every dimension, particularly with respect to trafficking and sexual exploitation, excisions, early marriages and forced labour (Cape Verde); 135.90. Continue efforts to tackle human trafficking, notably through enhancing awareness-raising initiatives (Senegal); 135.91. Continue efforts to effectively prevent human trafficking and reinforce law enforcement and the training of police (Netherlands); 135.92. Strengthen protection measures to protect children against violence (Senegal); 135.93. Ensure the protection of children's human rights by reducing and eliminating domestic and international child trafficking, sexual abuse, economic exploitation, “baby farming”, widespread homelessness, abuse stemming from belief in child witchcraft, and forced conversions (Holy See); 135.94. Urgently address child, early and forced marriage by putting in place legislation that clarifies the legal age for marriage, honouring commitments made in the country’s last UPR to prevent and eliminate the practice (Canada); 135.95. Take measures to prevent the sexual abuse, neglect and trafficking of children, child prostitution and pornography, in line with commitments under the OP-CRC-SC (Republic of Moldova); 135.96. Continue improving the situation of children, who were at risk, especially girls (State of Palestine); 135.97. End domestic and sexual violence against women and girls, by enacting laws and creating awareness in communities to end the social stigmatization relating to it (Maldives); 135.98. Continue to improve its public policies aimed at combating violence against women (Philippines); 135.99. Continue to make efforts to curb violence against women, especially with regard to the prohibition of female genital mutilation, at the national level (Republic of Korea); 135.100. Continue to work in favour of women’s rights, including the fight against early marriages, respecting the rights of widows, and eradicating female genital mutilation and respecting sexual and reproductive rights (France); 135.101. Enact a comprehensive national law prohibiting FGM and continue awareness-raising campaigns to eradicate this scourge (Austria); 135.102. Legislation for the eradication of FGM as well as to take effective measure to raise awareness of the people (Japan); 135.103. Continue efforts to eradicate the practice of female genital mutilation by, for example, taking into account the lessons learned by other countries in the region that deal with this practice (Netherlands); 135.104. Continue fighting against gender-related violence, including FGM, by enhancing measures, such as ad hoc awareness-raising campaigns and legal aid programme to increase victims' access to justice (Italy); 135.105. Ensure the protection of women's human rights by reducing and eliminating human trafficking, sexual violence and exploitation, domestic violence, maternal mortality, and female genital mutilation (Holy See); 135.106. Review conditions in detention facilities, including the behaviour of police officers working in them, and develop options for the improvement of the prison system, including how to tackle the problem of overcrowding (Germany); 135.107. Make sure that basic living conditions are met in prisons by providing food, drinking water and medical assistance (Austria); 135.108. Strengthen the system of independent monitoring in all detention facilities in accordance with the Optional Protocol to CAT (Czech Republic); 135.109. Establish a procedure for providing immediate registration of arrest and detention of people and ensure that their families were systematically informed (France); 135.110. Continue to improve prison conditions and the treatment of prisoners in line with human rights standards (Holy See); 135.111. Strengthen their efforts to ensure that the treatment of prisoners is in line with international standards (State of Palestine); 135.112. Establish a human rights monitoring system, which allows access to detention centres in northern Nigerian, works with affected communities and promotes accountability for serious violations of human rights (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 135.113. Facilitate access to justice for all citizens by establishing an effective justice support system (France); 135.114. Take steps to ensure that basic human rights principles are respected within all elements in its pluralistic legal system (Sierra Leone); 135.115. Take the necessary measures to ensure that the Child Rights Act of 2003 is incorporated in the legal system of the States and applied by all other entities (Belgium); 135.116. Continue the justice sector reform without any deviation (Turkey); 135.117. Ensure that all detainees suspected of a crime are brought before a court of law as soon as possible (Austria); 135.118. Ensure that all detainees who are kept in pre-trial detention are brought before a judge within the deadlines provided by the Constitution of Nigeria, or in the days following their arrest in accordance with the ICCPR (Belgium); 135.119. Continue with the necessary reforms for the more effective and efficient administration of justice aimed at reducing long periods of pre-trial waiting and minimize corrupt practices (Switzerland); 135.120. Address urgently the issue of impunity by strengthening the rule of law, including through a review of the judicial system (Germany); 135.121. Take effective action to ensure accountability of the armed forces and law enforcement officials (Australia); 135.122. Protect and promote the right of Nigerians to practice their religious faith or beliefs, including by enhancing the dialogue between different faith communities to address interreligious tensions – particularly those in the Middle Belt States – and to combat all forms of extremism (Canada); 135.123. Intensify efforts aimed at instituting interreligious dialogue between elders and religious leaders, including in areas not yet affected by religious unrest, and consider holding a national conference on religious tolerance (Sierra Leone); 135.124. Step up its awareness-raising and information activities focusing on religious and customary chiefs to ensure peaceful coexistence between people and religions (Togo); 135.125. Continue to support programmes that ensure religious coexistence and working on developing an interreligious dialogue (Sudan); 135.126. Continue strengthening the role of the Inter-Religious Council in order to deepen the ethical values and fight against the moral corruption so that extreme and radical ideologies are eradicated from the society (South Sudan); 135.127. Continue actions aimed at peaceful coexistence between different ethnic and religious groups in the country (Côte d’Ivoire); 135.128. Continue its efforts in responding to the ongoing violence by extremist groups against Christians and other minorities, by working to enforce human rights standards in protecting vulnerable populations, by prosecuting promoters of violence, and by promoting interreligious dialogue (Holy See); 135.129. Continue improving the living standards of its people, including an improvement of access to basic health and education services (Cuba); 135.130. Continue the efforts undertaken by the Government to guarantee inhabitants access to adequate housing and take the legal measures required to ensure the right to land tenure, in conformity with international law and international standards, and thus avoiding forced evictions (Ecuador); 135.131. Strengthen its cooperation with civil society and undertake a review of its involvement in the provision of core social services for children (Egypt); 135.132. Continue its efforts in improving access to affordable housing through proper implementation of its existing legal and policy frameworks including mortgage financing and its Public Private Partnership housing estate schemes (Malaysia); 135.133. Continue applying its successful practice to improve access to affordable housing (Turkmenistan); 135.134. Continue efforts to improve the standard of living, providing extensive access for the population to a quality system of education and health protection (Uzbekistan); 135.135. Improve access to quality healthcare for its people (Singapore); 
135.136. Continue implementing the Strategic National Plan for the development of health for the period 2010-2015 (Algeria); 135.137. Strengthen its capacity to provide care and support for children infected or affected by HIV/AIDS, particularly those orphaned (Bangladesh); 135.138. Strengthen policies towards provision of care and support to children infected by HIV/AIDS, particularly those orphaned (Botswana); 135.139. Strengthen its policies to provide care and support for children infected or affected by HIV/AIDS, particularly those orphaned (Egypt); 135.140. Continue efforts and implement its plans to eradicate polio in Nigeria (Ghana); 135.141. Identify and remove administrative, physical and any other barriers that still impede access to birth registration, thus facilitating for everyone the access to health care and education (Italy); 135.142. Step up efforts to guarantee free and compulsory birth registration for all children via public awareness-raising campaign on the importance of the registration of births (Uruguay); 135.143. Informs of the measures that will be enforced to support the health system (Lebanon); 135.144. Continue to increase education investment and provide better universal primary education (China); 135.145. Increase the commendable ongoing efforts aiming at granting full and free access to quality education for all children, inter alia, by boosting annual expenditure on education (Italy); 135.146. Adopt effective measures to ensure universal and free access to primary education, without discrimination between girls and boys (Portugal); 135.147. Implement the Universal Basic Education policy for all children without discrimination with focus on integration of children with disabilities and equal access for girls in primary and secondary education (Slovakia); 135.148. Continue her efforts and measures in investing in education for all as a means to guarantee the gender equality and to foster the human rights culture in the society (Viet Nam); 135.149. Address gender and regional disparities regarding the right to education (Bulgaria); 135.150. Continue to prioritize policies and programmes aimed at ensuring sustainable growth of the education sector (South Africa); 135.151. Continue their efforts to enhance respect and fulfillment of the right to education and to ensure access to education for girls and prevent early school dropout (State of Palestine); 135.152. Continue efforts in the educational sector and eradication of illiteracy (Sudan); 135.153. Continue to promote education and human rights training at the national level (Turkmenistan); 135.154. Continue consolidating the educational system in line with the needs of their population, to make progress towards delivering social well-being and encouraged Nigeria to continue on this path with the support and cooperation of the international community (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 135.155. Continue to implement policies and programmes to prevent early school dropout of girls (Sri Lanka); 135.156. Adopt a national policy on children with disabilities and ensure access to education and health services for all children with disabilities (Egypt); 135.157. Further develop educational services and programmes for the training of persons with disabilities in partnership with relevant institutions (Oman); 135.158. Continue with its public policies contained in the report, in the area of the right to health; including drafting policies which would allow for full access to health care services by persons with disabilities (Paraguay); 135.159. Adopt a national policy pertaining to children with disability, to take measures to tackle discrimination and to promote gender equality in the field of education and to guarantee a favourable climate for the activities of human rights defenders, journalists and other actors in civil society (Tunisia); 135.160. Protect and promote in particular the rights of vulnerable persons, that is: minorities, children, women, older persons, human rights defenders, refugees and prisoners (Djibouti); 135.161. Pay particular attention to defending the rights of vulnerable peoples, in particular women and children (Gabon); 135.162. Continue the active protection of vulnerable population groups, including children, women, disabled persons and the elderly (Russian Federation); 135.163. Consider investing further efforts in developing a foster care system for children without parental care and for children with disabilities (Serbia); 135.164. Better protect the rights of ethnic and other minorities, including so-called “settlers”, in particular their rights of citizenship and indigenous rights, and to ensure their equal and non-discriminatory treatment in the whole country (Germany); 135.165. Adopt measures to eliminate the economic, social and cultural barriers which exist between different ethnic and religious groups with the aim of facilitating coexistence between them (Mexico); 135.166. Consider working with Ghana and other like-minded countries to promote the Migrant Workers Convention (Ghana); 135.167. Continue to take measures to guarantee the right that its people have to enjoy a sustainable environment (Cuba); 135.168. Monitor the environmental impact of the oil industry on human rights of people in the Niger Delta, taking in the relevant and suitable measures (Maldives); 135.169. Consider strengthening measures to prevent and protect the human rights of local communities from environmental impacts (Thailand); 135.170. Guarantee respect for human rights in the fight against terrorism and ensure that all  perpetrators of violations, including extrajudicial executions, are prosecuted (France); 135.171. Mainstream human rights standards in counter-terrorism actions undertaken by security forces (Portugal); 135.172. Continue to strengthen its efforts to prevent human rights violations committed during counter-terrorist operations (Republic of Korea). 136. The following recommendations enjoy the support of Nigeria, which considers them to be already implemented: 136.1. Continue its efforts to progressively realize the right to education, including by exploring the possibility of providing free education for at the primary level (Indonesia); 136.2. Ensure access to education for girls and prevent early school dropout, including by reinforcing the Federal Government of Nigeria Gender Education Project (Egypt); 136.3. Ensure free and compulsory primary education (Bulgaria). 137. The following recommendations will be examined by Nigeria and responses will be provided in due time but no later than the twenty-fifth session of the Human Rights Council in March 2014: 137.1. Implement a moratorium on the death penalty, and take steps to accede to the Second Optional Protocol of the ICCPR (Australia); 137.2. Reinstate the moratorium on the death penalty with a view to acceding the Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR (Germany); 137.3. Fully abolish the death penalty and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR (Estonia); 137.4. Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Montenegro); 137.5. Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Brazil); 137.6. Amend article 12 of the Constitution to facilitate the automatic incorporation in the internal legal system of international conventions it has signed up to in the area of human rights (Spain); 137.7. Amend article 33 of the Constitution and order 237 on the police force to ensure that its interpretation does not allow the lethal use of force by the security forces in circumstances other than those enshrined in international law, and developed in the United Nations basic principles on the use of force and firearms by officials (Spain); 137.8. Continue awareness-raising campaigns to eradicate harmful traditional practices and introduce sex education in the school curricula (Slovakia); 137.9. Implement the recommendations of the April 2013 report by the NHRC on the Baga incident (Australia); 137.10.  Abolish the death penalty (Togo);  137.11.  Abolish the death penalty (Paraguay);  137.12.  Consider the abolition of the death penalty (Rwanda);  137.13.  Consider abolishing the death penalty (Holy See);  137.14. Establish an immediate moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing the death penalty (Portugal); 137.15. Immediately reinstate the moratorium on the death penalty with a view to abolishing it (Austria); 137.16. Reintroduce the moratorium and abolish capital punishment (Norway); 137.17. Reinstate the moratorium on the use of death penalty in accordance with the Nigeria’s commitment during the Universal Periodic Review in 2009 (Slovenia); 137.18. Renew the death penalty moratorium and consider abolishing capital punishment (Czech Republic); 137.19. Take the legal measures necessary to establish a moratorium on the use the death penalty (Ecuador); 137.20. Immediately reinstates the moratorium on death penalty (Switzerland); 137.21. Consider declaring a moratorium on the death penalty (Turkey); 137.22. Implement constitutional reform prohibiting the death penalty and in the meantime a moratorium for an indefinite period be adopted in line with international and African trends (Spain); 137.23. Immediately introduce a moratorium on executions and abolish the death penalty and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR (France); 137.24. Restore officially the moratorium on executions, which had been in place since 2006, throughout the whole country (Italy); 137.25. Commute all death penalties, progressively reduce the number of crimes that can be punished with the death penalty and eventually adopt measures for the complete abolition of the death penalty including accession to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Uruguay); 137.26.  Step up efforts to tackle the practice of early and forced marriages  (Italy);  137.27.  Adopt measures to address the high rate of early marriages among  girls in the northern states of Nigeria, including a review of legislation permitting marriage of those under 18 years of age and undertaking awareness-raising programmes on the negative implications of early marriage (Sierra Leone); 137.28. Ensure that neither the death penalty nor the life sentence is imposed for offences committed by persons below 18 years of age (Poland); 137.29. Ensure that neither the death penalty nor the life sentence is imposed for offences committed by persons under the age of 18 (Slovakia); 137.30. Proceed to review of the cases of all persons deprived of their liberty who have been sentenced to death for crimes committed when they were younger than 18, as well as to prohibit the application of the death penalty to persons under the age of 18 in national legislation (Uruguay); 137.31. Amend the trade union act in order to guarantee freedom of association and the effective recognition of the right of collective bargaining (United States of America); 137.32. Put an end to enforced expulsions in the south and ensure that compensation and relocation propositions are actually accorded to the people concerned (France); 137.33. Ensure that children of minority groups have equal access to education and introduce curricula recognizing their right to use and receive education in their own language (Bulgaria); 137.34. Modify the law on oil industries to reflect the opinion of the ECOWAS court, ensuring that the new legislation includes specific protection of the rights of communities affected by the activities of these companies (Spain). 138. The following recommendations did not enjoy the support of Nigeria: 138.1. Amend and review all legislation and policies, including the Same-Sex Marriage Bill, with a view to decriminalize LGBTI persons (Austria); 138.2. Revise laws discriminating against LGBTI persons, including refraining from signing into law any new legislation criminalizing LGBTIs (Czech Republic); 138.3. Establish policies and procedures that protect the human rights and security of all Nigerians including LGBT persons, their families and associates (United States of America); 138.4. Ensure the universality of human rights, safeguarding and protecting human rights of all Nigerians irrespective of gender, age, sexual orientation, gender identity or religious affiliation (Sweden); 138.5. Ensure that no legislation discriminates between men and women, and enact legislation to prevent violence against people based on sexual orientation (Canada); 138.6. Take steps to ensure that the human rights of all citizens are protected, regardless of their religion, sexual orientation or gender identity (Australia); 138.7. Consider the adoption of the necessary measures to eradicate discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation (Argentina); 138.8. Release all persons imprisoned or detained on the grounds of their sexual orientation or gender identity (Austria); 138.9. Repeal all provisions that give rise to discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity (France); 138.10. Adopt measures to combat discrimination against persons on the grounds of their sexual orientation or gender identity, and decriminalize sexual acts between consenting adults of the same sex, in order to bring its legislation in line with the Second Optional Protocol to the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Uruguay). 139. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex 
[English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of Nigeria was headed by Mr. Mohammed Bello ADOKE, SAN, Attorney General of the Federation and Minister of Justice and composed of the following members: • Dr. Nuruddeen MOHAMMED, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs; • Amb.	 Umunna H. ORJIAKO, Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of Nigeria, Geneva; • Hon. Beni LAR, Chair, House Committee on Human Rights; • Hon. M. O. BAMIDELE, Member, House Committee on Human Rights; • Hon. M. I. IDRIS, Member, House Committee on Human Rights; • Hon. K. A. MAILANTARKI, Member, House Committee on Human Rights; • Amb. Mark B. EGBE, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mrs. 	Beatrice Jedy-AGBA, Executive Secretary of the National Agency for the Prohibition of Traffic in Persons (NAPTIP); • Mr. Kayode LARO, Permanent Mission of Nigeria, Geneva; • Amb. I. Akabogu-CHINWUBA, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Prof. Peter AKPER, SAN, Federal Ministry of Justice; • Mr. Freeborn OMUEZA, Ministry of Defence; • Mrs. Victoria N. UZOIGWE, Federal Ministry of Justice; • Mr. R. K. MOSES, Federal Ministry of Justice; • Mrs. Helen NWOKO, Office of the Secretary to the Government of the Federation (OSGF); • Dr. I. W. ORAKWE, Nigeria Prisons Service; • Mr. Nwidibo Felix EKECHUKWU, Nigeria Police; • Mr. Patrick Effiong ENYETING, Nigeria Police; • Mrs. Violet OGBULAFOR, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Patrick Ali OROKPO, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Wilcox IDAMINABO, Department of State Services (DSS); • Mr. Umoru Moses IDAKWO, Department of State Services (DSS); • Mr. Nennadubari P. GBENEOL, The Presidency; • Mr. Foluso ESAN, The Presidency; • Ms. Hauwa Ibrahim KUCHI, Federal Ministry of Justice; • Ms. Ola Tochi OJI, Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC); • Mr. P. C. Y. GBEMUDU, Permanent Mission of Nigeria, Geneva; • Mr. Mohammed HAIDARA, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Rommy Beerber MOM, Federal Ministry of Justice; • Prof. Sylvester SHIKYIL, University of Jos; • Mr. Muhammad Lamin SHEHU, Permanent Mission of Nigeria, Geneva; • Barr. Blessing OMAKWU, House of Representatives; • Mrs. Vivian OZOLUA, House of Representatives. 