Distr.: General 7 July 2014 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-seventh session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Norway * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.14-07536  (E) *1407536* 
Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–130 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–10 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 11–130 4 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 131–132 13  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 27 Introduction 
1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its nineteenth session from 28 April 7 to 9 May 2014. The review of Norway was held at the 1st meeting, on 28 April 2014. The delegation of Norway was headed by Børge Brende, Minister of Foreign Affairs. At its 10th meeting, held on 2 May 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on Norway. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Norway: Congo, Indonesia and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Norway: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/19/NOR/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/19/NOR/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/19/NOR/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by the Czech Republic, Germany, Liechtenstein, Mexico, the Netherlands, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain and the United Kingdom was transmitted to Norway through the troika. The questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR). I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation stated that the UPR mechanism was an important pillar of the Human Rights Council. Human rights were well protected in Norway and Norway had a longstanding commitment to human rights at both the international and national levels. In preparing the national report, Norway had consulted civil society. 6. The Norwegian State was established on the territory of two peoples: the Norwegians and the Sami, who were recognized as an indigenous people. There were five national minorities in Norway: Kven, Jews, Forest Finns, Roma and Romani. 7. In order to strengthen and simplify the legal framework on discrimination, the Government was currently working on a new comprehensive equality and anti.discrimination act. The delegation reaffirmed that Norway was waging a continuous battle against forced marriage and female genital mutilation. 8. In response to questions from the Netherlands and Portugal, the delegation stated that the Government had decided to establish a new independent national human rights institution that complied with the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles). 9. The delegation stated that combating domestic violence was a priority for the Government. Domestic violence was totally unacceptable and perpetrators must expect to be prosecuted and punished. Important measures for combating domestic violence were prevention and early identification, help and protection for victims, prosecution and treatment of perpetrators, and competence-building within the police and welfare services.  10. Regarding asylum seekers who were minors, the delegation stated that the Government attached great importance to ensuring a rapid asylum process with legal safeguards for those children, as well as good living conditions during the process. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 11. During the interactive dialogue, 89 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue can be found in section II below. 12. Iraq noted that Norway had acceded to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) and ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (OP-CAT), and had made efforts to establish a national human rights institution that could make recommendations to improve the human rights situation. 13. Ireland noted the concerns expressed by the Committee against Torture and the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention about the lack of statistics on the use of solitary confinement. It also noted that, in 2012, the International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions had recommended that the Norwegian Centre for Human Rights be downgraded from A to B status. 14. Iran (Islamic Republic of) expressed concern about a number of human rights issues. 15. Israel drew attention to a survey on the Norwegian population’s attitudes towards the Jewish community which revealed that anti-Semitism and anti-Jewish harassment persisted. It asked what specific measures would be adopted to strengthen and support efforts to combat anti-Semitism.  16. Italy noted that despite the efforts that had been made, statistics on cases of domestic violence had not improved since the first UPR cycle. 17. Japan noted the unequal status of immigrants in the labour market and the low employment rate for immigrant women, and encouraged Norway to take further steps to address such issues. 18. Jordan commended the Human Rights Commission for recommending the incorporation of a number of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights in the Norwegian Constitution. 19. Kyrgyzstan noted the measures to combat violence against children that were included in the new action plan against domestic violence. 20. Libya highlighted the action being taken by Norway to protect the rights and well.being of children. 21. Malaysia enquired about the Government’s plan of action on establishing a new national human rights institution and asked whether a timetable had been set to move the process forward. It encouraged the Government to implement the key national priorities set for its human rights agenda. 22. Maldives said that the new anti-discrimination legislation, particularly the act on accessibility for persons with disabilities, would help ensure equal opportunities in the workplace. However, more efforts were needed to promote tolerance and respect for diversity. 23. Mexico recognized the legislative and institutional progress made since the first UPR cycle, such as the ratification of international instruments and the introduction of legislation against discrimination. It encouraged Norway to establish a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles as soon as possible. 24. The Republic of Moldova noted the progress made in implementing the recommendations of the first UPR cycle and the international and national efforts to combat human trafficking, but challenges remained regarding procedures and criteria for identifying victims of trafficking. 25. Montenegro recognized the steps the Government had taken to promote human rights and implement new mechanisms to address problem areas, in particular discrimination and domestic violence. 26. The Netherlands noted the external review of the Norwegian Centre for Human Rights, which was not in compliance with the Paris Principles, and highlighted concerns about the situation of detainees, specifically the length of police custody. 27. New Zealand encouraged Norway to move to full implementation of CRPD, particularly regarding the use of coercion in mental health care, and noted the Government’s desire to reduce the use of coercion in that context.  28. Nicaragua noted the growing number of women victims of trafficking and the prevalence of violence against women in Norway. It encouraged Norway to continue its leadership role in the Human Rights Council and to promote dialogue and cooperation between countries. 29. The Niger noted the new legislation enacted to combat discrimination, especially on the grounds of ethnicity, religion and disability, and the measures adopted to promote the rights of indigenous peoples, minorities, refugees and asylum seekers. 30. Nigeria invited Norway to accede to the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (OP-ICESCR) and urged it to continue improving conditions for migrants, denounce racial discrimination in more practical terms and expedite the process of establishing a fully-fledged national human rights institution. 31. Pakistan was encouraged by efforts made by Norway to implement the recommendations from the first UPR cycle and steps taken over the previous four years to protect and promote human rights in the country. 32. Paraguay highlighted progress in terms of respect for human rights in Norway, but expressed concern that in 20 to 30 per cent of murders committed in the previous decade, the victim and perpetrator had been a couple. 33. The Philippines believed that Norway had much to share in terms of best practice on protecting and promoting human rights, but regretted that it had still not acceded to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW), despite its steadfast advocacy for equality and non.discrimination. 34. The Norwegian delegation, in response to questions concerning the situation of the Roma, said that improving their situation was a priority for the Government. Norway was supporting measures for the social inclusion of the Roma through 80 programmes in 10 European countries.  35. A grant scheme had been established to provide humanitarian assistance to foreign beggars. Migrant Roma had not been targets of serious hate crime. 36. In response to a question from Mexico, the delegation said that the consultations between the central Government and the Sami Parliament would to be undertaken in good faith with the objective of achieving agreement. The consultation mechanism ensured that decision makers were well acquainted with the views of the Sami Parliament. 37. In response to a question from Mexico on how indigenous people participate in decisions on the use of land and natural resources, the delegation referred to the Finnmark Act, which had established the Finnmark Estate, an independent entity that owned all the land in Finnmark county that had previously belonged to the State. The Sami Parliament appointed half of the Finnmark Estate board members. 38. In response to a question from Germany regarding indigenous peoples and mining activities, the delegation emphasized that the mineral industry played an important role in securing jobs and development in rural areas. Norwegian legislation included a number of provisions that safeguarded Sami interests in that context.  39. In response to a question from the Netherlands, the delegation emphasized that rape was a serious and totally unacceptable crime. In the Penal Code, rape was defined by listing factors that negate consent. The Government’s ambition was to reduce the incidence of rape, assist victims in the best way possible and improve the way rape cases were handled in the criminal justice system.  40. In response to a question from the Netherlands about prolonged detention in police holding cells, the delegation stated that regulations required detainees to be transferred from police custody to a normal prison within 48 hours of their arrest, unless practical considerations made that impossible.  41. In response to questions from Ireland and the Netherlands on the use of solitary confinement in detention, the delegation said that major improvements had been made in that regard in recent years. The courts could approve isolation only if stringent conditions were satisfied and the time limits were strict. There had been a significant reduction in the use of solitary confinement, which was normally reserved for the most serious cases and lasted for short periods only. Concerning solitary confinement during the execution of sentences, the delegation described measures to ensure that solitary confinement was applied more selectively. 42. In response to questions and recommendations from Kyrgyzstan and Mexico on education for minors seeking asylum, the delegation indicated that all children in Norway had the same legal right and duty to attend primary and lower secondary school, regardless of background.  43. In response to a question from the United Kingdom concerning the standard of emergency shelters and social housing, especially for families with children, the delegation stated that Norwegian municipalities were obliged to find temporary accommodation for persons who were unable to find accommodation by themselves. The accommodation had to be of a sufficient standard to meet the needs of the persons concerned. 44. Responding to a question from Mexico on the export of arms or munitions, the delegation said that Norway had a strict, long-standing arms export policy. It did not permit the sale of arms or munitions to areas in which there was a war, civil war or threat of war. 45. Responding to a question from Spain, the delegation answered that the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights were a cornerstone of the Government’s approach to human rights and business. 46. Responding to a question from Israel about combating anti-Semitism, Norway emphasized that knowledge was a key factor and described measures aimed at preventing anti-Semitism in schools. 47. Responding to questions from, inter alia, Malaysia, Paraguay, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia and Timor-Leste about the gender pay gap, the delegation stated that it had decreased over time, but that on average, women continued to earn 12.7 per cent less than men per hour, primarily owing to the gender divide in the labour market. The Government hoped to further reduce the gender pay gap. 48. In response to recommendations from Italy and New Zealand, the delegation emphasized that the Government would pursue efforts to reduce the use of coercion in the mental health services. The use of coercion was strictly regulated by law and could be used as a last resort only, in order to care for patients with serious mental illness. 49. Responding to recommendations that Norway should accede to ICRMW, the delegation said that Norway had ratified all the International Labour Organization core conventions on workers’ rights, which also applied to residents who were foreign nationals. Norway had, however, decided not to accede to ICRMW. 50. The delegation noted that some States had recommended that Norway should accede to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure, OP-ICESCR and the Optional Protocol to CRPD. The Government was thoroughly investigating the legal implications before making a decision. Two legal studies had been commissioned and circulated for general review and those questions were still under consideration. 51. Norway was currently considering the question of ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (ICPED). 52. In response to questions from Mexico and others concerning hate crime, the delegation underlined the seriousness of such offences and reiterated that hatred towards specific groups was considered an aggravating circumstance by the courts. The Penal Code had been amended in 2013 to extend criminal liability for certain kinds of statements made in public to statements made on the Internet.  53. Poland noted efforts made by Norway to comply with the recommendations of the first review, but acknowledged that, despite many positive developments in the field of human rights, certain challenges remained. 54. Portugal observed that the dropout rate in upper secondary schools in Norway was higher among immigrant students. It requested further information about the Government’s ongoing process to re-establish its national human rights institution. 55. The Russian Federation drew attention to problems relating to freedom of belief. It also noted that, when children were removed from parental care and placed with new families, insufficient attention was paid in some cases to their cultural, linguistic and religious identity. Moreover, foster children had reportedly been subjected to violence. 56. Rwanda noted efforts made by Norway to fulfil its human rights commitments since its last UPR, including improving gender equality and accessibility for persons with disabilities and combating forced marriage, female genital mutilation and domestic violence. It also commended Norway for its handling of the cases of genocide suspects through prosecution and extradition. 57. Saudi Arabia expressed concern about persistent cases of domestic violence, rape and hate crime targeted at certain ethnic groups and minorities, particularly Muslims. It urged the Government to take vigorous action against hate crimes and to promote the equality of all citizens.  58. Serbia acknowledged positive developments in strengthening human rights in the country. It suggested that Norway step up its efforts to address discrimination of vulnerable groups in the context of its national integration policy. 59. Sierra Leone commended Norway for its generous assistance to development overseas. It stressed the importance of developing strategies to promote tolerance and diversity and strengthening measures to ensure greater equality for women and minorities. It was concerned about reports of hate speech and hate crime against minority groups, asylum seekers and immigrants. 60. Slovenia recognized Norway as a role model in terms of safeguarding democracy, ensuring the rule of law and focusing efforts on addressing key human rights challenges currently facing States globally in a turbulent world. 61. South Africa expressed appreciation for the continued and consistent contribution of Norway to development projects in Africa. It noted efforts made by Norway since its last review and encouraged it to continue its efforts to promote, protect and fulfil human rights in the country. 62. Spain noted that the Government of Norway had decided to establish a new independent international human rights institution and that measures were being taken to tackle the problem of gender-based violence. 63. Cuba expressed concern about persistent discrimination against Romani, indigenous and immigrant communities, incitement to hatred, and xenophobic, anti-Semitic and Islamophobic statements. 64. The State of Palestine noted that Norway had taken measures to ascertain the nature, extent and causes of discrimination in various areas of society. 65. The Sudan enquired about the main achievements and lessons learned through the implementation of the Action Plan to Promote Equality and Prevent Ethnic Discrimination. 66. Switzerland expressed concern regarding the duration of police custody and of solitary confinement in both police custody and pretrial detention. It was also concerned about allegations of arbitrary deprivation of liberty and arbitrary constraint measures in mental health-care centres. 67. Thailand noted with interest the establishment of Children’s Houses providing assistance to child victims of exploitation and abuse.  68. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia referred to treaty body concerns regarding gender inequality and inadequate representation of women with minority backgrounds in prominent societal roles. It enquired about the results of the work undertaken by KOMpakt, the Government’s consultative body, and requested details of the 2013 white paper concerning domestic violence.  69. Timor-Leste noted that there were areas, such as gender equality, equal remuneration for men and women, and the right to education of indigenous peoples, in which further improvements were required.  70. Togo expressed concern about discrimination against the immigrant population, especially in the labour market, housing, education and health care.  71. Tunisia encouraged Norway to ratify CPED and to expedite the establishment of a national human rights institution that complied with the Paris Principles.  72. Turkey noted the increase in Islamophobic, anti-Semitic and racially motivated hate crimes.  73. Turkmenistan expressed concern about reports of an increase in xenophobic attitudes to immigrants. It noted with regret that trafficking in persons, particularly girls, remained a problem and noted with concern reports that the number of victims was steadily increasing. 74. Ukraine noted the establishment of an interministerial coordination group to strengthen the implementation of recommendations accepted by Norway and improve its reporting to the human rights treaty bodies. 75. The United Kingdom urged Norway to intensify its efforts to ensure that emergency shelters and social housing units met an adequate standard, especially for families with children, and to strengthen strategies to prevent discrimination against migrant Roma and provide for their basic needs. 76. The United States of America was concerned that preventive measures had not reduced the incidence of domestic violence and rape, and concerned at the high level of acquittals, lenient sentences and the legal definition of rape, which required the use or threat of force. It was also concerned at the treatment of asylum seekers and stateless persons, especially minors. 77. Uruguay encouraged Norway to complete the process of ratification of OP-ICESCR and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure. 78. Uzbekistan noted concerns about discrimination against immigrants, particularly in the labour market, education, health care and housing, and expressions of racial hatred and intolerance, especially against the Sami people, as well as high rates of violence against women and of human trafficking. 79. Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) expressed concern about the persistence of crimes motivated by prejudice and incitement to hatred against specific minority groups, such as the Roma. 80. Viet Nam noted that the strengthened legal framework in Norway better ensured gender equality and improved living standards for indigenous peoples and minorities. Norway participated in education, training and international cooperation in the field of human rights and was committed to the protection of vulnerable groups.  81. Albania said that Norwegian citizens benefited from the highest standards of democracy and freedom. Norway had developed human rights standards in respect of gender equality, the rights of persons with disabilities and those of minorities. 82. In response to questions from Liechtenstein and Spain and recommendations from the United States on asylum and immigration, the Norwegian delegation stated that the Government would continue to fulfil its international obligations in the areas of migration and asylum policies. 83. The Government maintained that the asylum system was a key tool in providing protection to those who were genuinely in need, and that it must not be abused. Asylum status was granted on the basis of individual processing and a thorough assessment of each application. 84. Responding to issues raised by the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Republic of Moldova and Nicaragua concerning trafficking in human beings, the delegation described, inter alia, the 2010 action plan on measures to fight all forms of human trafficking, steps to provide safe housing and appropriate follow-up of victims and provisions in the Immigration Act strengthening the protection of victims. The question of establishing a national referral mechanism to better identify and assist victims of trafficking was being assessed. 85. Responding to questions from India, the Russian Federation and Turkey, the delegation said that the purpose of the Child Welfare Act was to protect children. A care order was relevant only if the child’s situation was serious and could not be alleviated through the application of voluntary assistance measures. The underlying principle of the Act was that a child should grow up with its biological parents. A care order could be issued only if a child’s care was seriously deficient or the child was a victim of abuse.  86. Responding to questions about ethnic discrimination from, inter alia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Mexico, Nigeria, Poland and the Sudan, Norway referred to the Action Plan to Promote Equality and Prevent Ethnic Discrimination. 87. Algeria encouraged Norway to expedite the process of establishing a new national human rights institution and to ratify ICRMW. 88. Angola, while noting the progress Norway had made on human rights, not least on gender equality issues, drew attention to the continuing problem of the integration of migrants, since that group suffered the highest levels of unemployment.  89. Argentina noted that Norway had indicated that it would prioritize ratification of ICPED. Argentina shared its concern about and commitment to the elimination of discrimination. 90. Armenia appreciated the help Norway had provided to the survivors of the Armenian genocide, its integration policy for migrants and minorities and its commitment to the elimination of hate speech and hate crime.  91. Australia observed that the UPR report highlighted the consistent promotion by Norway of human rights and democratic principles. Norway had introduced four new anti.discrimination acts in January 2014, covering sexual orientation, gender equality, ethnicity and persons with disabilities.  92. Austria recognized the high standards that Norway had achieved in the promotion and protection of human rights, its contributions to the system of international human rights protection and its commitment to the advancement of human rights globally. 93. Azerbaijan highlighted concerns about discrimination against migrants, persons from immigrant backgrounds, asylum seekers and refugees in accessing public services, health services and employment, and allegations of ill-treatment of, and hate speech directed at, minorities and other vulnerable groups. 94. Bahrain expressed concern about reports of discrimination against minorities and indigenous peoples, especially women and children. It was also concerned about persistent hate speech and incitement to xenophobia and to religious hatred. 95. Bangladesh observed that Norway had not yet ratified ICRMW and that there remained scope for further attention to preventing discrimination against immigrants.  96. Belarus expressed concern about migrant integration and employment issues and the problems encountered by Roma, especially in the education system. It was also concerned about reports of incitement to hatred and other forms of intolerance, including by political parties. 97. Benin noted that Norway had ratified a number of international conventions on human rights, including CRPD and OP-CAT, in response to the recommendations received in 2009. 98. Botswana noted efforts made to address discrimination against migrants and asylum seekers, but encouraged Norway to do more to prevent violence. It also noted that challenges remained in gender mainstreaming and in combating substance abuse by children and young people.  99. Brazil referred to policies introduced to encourage gender equality, religious tolerance and access to social security by foreign residents. It indicated that immediate attention should be given to the best interests of the child, specifically in all immigration matters, and to the situation of migrants. 100. Canada asked what progress Norway had achieved since 2009 in generating data on manifestations of racial discrimination and the situation of minority groups in order to identify patterns of direct and indirect discrimination. 101. Chile noted that human rights had been strengthened through recent amendments to the Norwegian Constitution and that the country had the capacity to renew its efforts to tackle domestic violence, promote equality of opportunity and combat all forms of discrimination. 102. China noted the progress made in protecting children’s rights and in combating domestic violence and human trafficking. However, violence against women continued, Roma and migrants suffered discrimination and the Sami language and culture could not be guaranteed. 103. The Republic of the Congo noted that more action was required to combat discrimination against women, minorities, indigenous peoples and persons of foreign origin. The fact that minors were detained together with adults was a cause for concern. 104. Costa Rica noted that Norway had ratified several international human rights instruments, introduced measures to combat discrimination against minorities and made commitments to improve the situation of asylum seekers and refugees. 105. Côte d’Ivoire noted the institutional and legislative reforms undertaken by Norway in respect of human rights, including gender equality and the rights of persons with disabilities, national minorities, migrants and asylum seekers. 106. Sri Lanka noted the progress made in the area of children’s rights but stated that gender equality remained a challenge; higher education programmes were gender-divided and women earned lower wages than men. It acknowledged that targeted measures were being taken to tackle the high unemployment rate among immigrants. 107. The Czech Republic noted the efforts being taken in Norway to improve access to education for Roma. Reducing absenteeism required addressing the underlying social causes and the full cooperation of all stakeholders, including parents. 108. Denmark indicated that continuous monitoring and reporting of the human rights situation in Norway would be essential to track results of efforts made. It welcomed work on the draft Nordic Sami Convention, which would advance the rights of the Sami across country borders. 109. Ecuador was concerned at the situation of ethnic minorities, particularly the Roma, and at the high number of complaints by migrants of ill-treatment at the hands of the police and other representatives of the State. 110. Egypt urged Norway to address concerns regarding the treatment of migrants and to investigate allegations of racial profiling by law enforcement officers, refoulement of asylum seekers and disappearances of unaccompanied minors from asylum centres. 111. Estonia said that Norway had taken positive steps in ratifying international human rights instruments and in protecting the rights of indigenous peoples and minorities, including lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons (LGBTI). 112. Finland asked what targeted measures were being taken to ensure that more immigrant women could find work. Noting the disappearance of children from reception centres, it asked how Norway was working to protect children who sought asylum from becoming victims of trafficking. 113. France asked how Norway would make combating violence against women and children a priority and how it would ensure that sick children had equal access to health care in different parts of the country. 114. Gabon recognized the commitment of Norway to human rights and its ratification of human rights instruments. Norway combated inequalities in society and in particular was tackling the gender pay gap. Gabon asked about the results that had been achieved through the equality and anti-discrimination action plan. 115. Germany appreciated the efforts Norway had made in response to recommendations made in the previous cycle and recognized its very good national and international human rights record. 116. Ghana noted the commitment of Norway to upholding human rights, but expressed concern that certain minorities were the target of hate crime and racism. Efforts should be intensified to address the gender pay gap. 117. Greece expressed concern at the persistence of hate speech, as noted by the Human Rights Committee, and asked what action was being taken to fight it. Greece also expressed concern that the national human rights institution had been downgraded. 118. Guatemala noted the progress made in human rights in Norway but shared concerns at reports that over half of the immigrant population suffered discrimination in accessing employment, housing, education and health care. 119. Honduras acknowledged the efforts Norway had made to improve employment opportunities for immigrants by providing language training. It further noted the country’s efforts to combat violence and rape. 120. Hungary considered the amendment to the Constitution to be a positive step, but sought clarification of the reference to the Church of Norway as the national church. Unaccompanied asylum-seeking children between the ages of 15 and 18 years suffered discrimination. 121. Iceland noted the commitment of Norway to achieving gender equality, combating domestic violence, and violence and sexual abuse against children and young people. It asked whether Norway intended to strengthen its assistance to victims of trafficking. 122. India noted the discrimination experienced by immigrants and asylum seekers in gaining access to public services and employment. A high incidence of rape had been reported, with half of victims being below the age of 18. Violence and hate speech persisted. 123. Indonesia noted the firm commitment of Norway to human rights. It requested that Norway ensure the protection of all minors in conflict with the law, taking into account the principle of the best interests of the child. 124. Romania highlighted developments in human rights in Norway since the previous UPR and a comprehensive mid-term report. It sought more information on human rights education in the country. 125. In response to a comment from Denmark, the Norwegian delegation said that Norway, Sweden and Finland had commenced negotiations on a Nordic Sami Convention in 2011. The aim was to complete the negotiations in 2016. 126. Responding to other questions, the delegation provided information about the action plan on domestic violence, the right of victims of domestic violence to free legal aid, the duty of local authorities to provide victims of domestic violence with shelter and coordinated assistance, and recent amendments to the Penal Code to increase the punishment for abuse in close relationships. 127. In response to questions from Libya and Thailand on investigations into offences against children, the delegation provided information about the judicial examination of children, which was carried out in special Children’s Houses by specially trained police officers, and about measures aimed at reducing the waiting time before such examinations took place.  128. In response to a question from Brazil about immigration cases, the delegation underlined the importance of the best interest of the child, which was always a primary consideration. Regarding a question from Austria, the delegation described challenges and dilemmas concerning unaccompanied minor asylum seekers. 129. Responding to questions from Angola and Armenia about the integration of immigrants, Norway said that participation in working life and good Norwegian language skills were keys to integration in Norwegian society. The Government would improve its provision of language training and ensure that the Introduction Programme was better adapted to each individual.  130. In conclusion, Norway noted with appreciation the participation of all delegations in the review. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations.. 131. The following recommendations will be examined by Norway, which will respond to them in due course, but no later than the twenty-seventh session of the Human Rights Council, in September 2014: 131.1 Ratify those conventions to which it is not yet a party, and accelerate the incorporation in its domestic legal order of the provisions of those conventions to which it is already a party to (Niger); 131.2 Ratify the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (Italy); 131.3 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance in a timely fashion (Japan); 131.4 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (France); 131.5 Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Paraguay); 131.6 Sign and subsequently ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Ecuador); 131.7 Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Sri Lanka); 131.8 Accede to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Azerbaijan); 131.9 Withdraw its Declaration from Articles 12 and 14 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) (Pakistan); ** The conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 131.10 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Spain); 131.11 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, as a key way of strengthening the functions of the Committee and improving the protection and credibility of these rights (Spain); 131.12 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the ICESCR, as recommended previously (Portugal); 131.13 Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the CRC on a communications procedure (Portugal); 131.14 Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Portugal); 131.15 Seriously consider ratifying the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, as well as the optional protocols to the ICESCR and CRC (Sierra Leone); 131.16 Consider lifting its reservations in respect of article 10, paragraphs 2 (b) and 3 of the ICCPR, in line with South Africa’s previous recommendation (South Africa); 131.17 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, as well as recognize the competence of its Committee (Uruguay); 131.18 Continue considering the ratification of the Optional Protocol to CRC on a communications procedure (Albania); 131.19 Continue efforts aimed at the ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Argentina); 131.20 Accelerate the process of ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Congo); 131.21 Review its reservations to certain articles of the ICCPR and ICESCR with a view to withdrawing them (Austria); 131.22 Ratify the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse, signed by Norway on 25 October 2007 (France); 131.23 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (Germany); 131.24 Consider becoming party to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and that relating to persons with disabilities, both of which relate to individual grievance procedures (Ghana); 131.25 Embody the principles of equality of women and men in the Constitution and other appropriate legislation (Jordan); 131.26 Amend the Anti-Discrimination Act to ensure that all grounds of discrimination are subject to prohibition (Jordan); 131.27 Amend the law on the fight against discrimination so that all grounds for discrimination are subject to prohibition (Tunisia); 131.28 Ensure protection against all forms of discrimination by incorporating in its laws, the principle of equality in accordance with CEDAW, ICERD and CRPD (Pakistan); 131.29 Strengthen the domestic legislation in accordance with international law to prevent and address violence against women and girls (Maldives); 131.30 Enact specific legislation to put in place comprehensive measures to prevent and address violence against women and girls, and provide adequate assistance and protection to the victims (Poland); 131.31 Enact specific comprehensive legislation on domestic violence and put in place general measures to prevent violence against women and girls, including marital rape and ensure that perpetrators be prosecuted and punished in accordance with the severity of the crimes committed (Honduras); 131.32 Strengthen domestic legislation on the prevention of torture in accordance with CAT (Maldives); 131.33 Review the legislation to ensure full freedom of belief, conscience and religion (Russian Federation); 131.34 Amend legislation in the area of adoption of children in order to better ensure the protection of the rights of children (Russian Federation); 131.35 Strengthen the legal definition of rape by grounding it in lack of consent, rather than the use or threat of force, to ensure that the law provides better protection for survivors (United States of America); 131.36 Continue to take steps to ensure the rights of LGBT persons, women, ethnic minorities, and persons with disabilities are protected, including through implementation of the four new anti-discrimination acts that entered into force in January 2014 (Australia); 131.37 Bring national legislation on elections in line with international standards and commitments by allowing citizens to timely appeal to courts in matters relating to the exercise of the right to choose their local government and national Parliament (Belarus); 131.38 Incorporate, in accordance with the Committee’s recommendation, the Convention against Torture into the domestic law (Egypt); 131.39 Amend the criminal code to address hate speech and incitement to violence and discrimination in the context of the media and election campaigning (Egypt); 131.40 Ratify the Kampala Amendments to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court on the crime of aggression (Estonia); 131.41 Enact laws to criminalize contemplation of prophets and religions through all kinds of media (visual, audio and printed), and enact laws to determine the penalty for rape in law and follow-up application (Saudi Arabia); 131.42 Enact laws to ensure gender equality in wages and to reduce domestic violence and follow-up application (Saudi Arabia); 131.43 Speed up the establishment of a National Institution for Human Rights as a new independent concerned party involved in monitoring and promoting human rights in accordance with the Paris Principles, enact laws against any kind of discrimination against indigenous peoples, Roma minorities and foreigners, which most notably in the areas of education, health and employment (Saudi Arabia); 131.44 Put in place a national human rights institution which is in full compliance with the Paris Principles (Ireland); 131.45 Establish a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Sierra Leone); 131.46 Establish a new NHRI, in accordance with the Paris Principles (Hungary); 131.47 Create a National Human Rights Institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 131.48 Establish a National Human Rights Institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Egypt); 131.49 Expedite steps being taken to establish an independent National Human Rights Institution (Ghana); 131.50 Establish an independent institution in compliance with the United Nations Paris Principles (South Africa); 131.51 Put in place a new fully independent national human rights institution in line with the Paris Principles (Canada); 131.52 Re-establish a fully independent National Human Rights Institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Denmark); 131.53 Pursue efforts to re-establish the A status of the Norwegian Centre for Human Rights, guaranteeing its full independence (Chile); 131.54 Move quickly to establish its new National Human Rights Institution in full compliance with the Paris Principles (Australia); 131.55 Take all the measures necessary at the national level for the National Human Rights Institution to comply fully with the Paris Principles and be provided with the necessary financial and human resources to fully carry out its functions (Uruguay); 131.56 Consider the possibility of speeding up the process of establishing a new National Human Rights Institution in full compliance with the Paris Principles (Ukraine); 131.57 Speed up its efforts to establish a NHRI in accordance with the Paris Principles and provide sufficient resources for it to be effective (Malaysia); 131.58 Establish the new National Human Rights Institution in such a way that it can operate effectively and independently, in full compliance with the Paris Principles (Netherlands); 131.59 Re-establish the NHRI as a vital, clearly independent institution with a strong mandate and sufficient capacity and resources to strengthen implementation of human rights in the country (Greece); 131.60 That the new National Human Rights Institution be independent, and be given a strong mandate, capacity and resources for the effective realization at the national level of human rights (Spain); 131.61 Complete the process of putting in place the New National Human Rights Institution on the basis of the Paris Principles (Niger); 131.62 Accelerate the establishment of the new national human rights institution with a mandate in accordance with the Paris Principles as a matter of priority (Thailand); 131.63 Establish a national human rights institution with “A” status in full conformity with the Paris Principles (Guatemala); 131.64 Continue its efforts to consider the creation of a new national human rights institution guided by the Paris Principles (Indonesia); 131.65 Continue its efforts to ensure that the Equality and Anti-Discrimination Ombudsperson’s office has adequate resources to promote its work (Montenegro); 131.66 Provide additional resources to the office of the Equality and Anti-Discrimination Ombudsperson in order to combat discrimination and hate crime against migrant Roma (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 131.67 Give the full necessary consideration, in its international cooperation activities in the field of Human Rights with other countries, to aligning its efforts and contributions with the priorities, policies, and national plans of the concerned countries in a spirit of genuine dialogue (Sudan); 131.68 Develop a national action plan for human rights education that consists of a thorough needs assessment and programmes for human rights education at all levels (Turkmenistan); 131.69 Adopt a new action plan, to promote equality and prevent ethnic discrimination, as well as prevent and combat discrimination against persons from immigrant backgrounds (Honduras); 131.70 Do more to address gender mainstreaming in line with the equality policy (Botswana); 131.71 Provide, in accordance with its obligations under International Human Rights Law, the widest possible protection and support for the family, as the natural and fundamental unit of society (Egypt); 131.72 Continue efforts aimed at countering gender stereotypes and discriminative attitudes, as well as at further promotion of gender equality (Ukraine); 131.73 Take effective actions to curb over-sexualization of women in media (Bangladesh); 131.74 Continue to promote gender equality in the country and share its experience with other nations (Cuba); 131.75 Ensure the respect of gender equality both in offices and in schools (Timor-Leste); 131.76 Intensify efforts to prevent discrimination against ethnic groups and combat discrimination against persons from immigrants backgrounds (Greece); 131.77 Adopt the measures necessary to combat all forms of discrimination against migrants (Guatemala); 131.78 Develop a strategy to effectively combat the public expression of racial intolerance (Russian Federation); 131.79 Take efficient measures to combat any manifestation of discrimination, racism, xenophobia and intolerance in society, including by adopting and implementing a comprehensive national plan of action (Uzbekistan); 131.80 Adopt more substantive measures against racism and xenophobia and establish corresponding mechanisms for monitoring and ensuring accountability (China); 131.81 Continue the efforts to combat all forms of discrimination, in particular Islamophobia (Algeria); 131.82 Combat more effectively and decisively prejudices such as racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and other related forms of intolerance (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 131.83 Continue its efforts in the prevention and fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance (Turkmenistan); 131.84 Continue and intensify its efforts to prevent and eliminate all forms of de facto discrimination against ethnic groups and persons of immigrant backgrounds (Canada); 131.85 Take stronger measures to combat discrimination and other forms of intolerance, including by promoting tolerance and diversity, as well as prosecuting those responsible for such acts (Cuba); 131.86 Take further measures to combat racist manifestations, in particular against Roma people (Turkey); 131.87 Continue on its constructive path to promoting equality and non.discrimination (State of Palestine); 131.88 Establish and implement strategies to combat effectively discrimination against ethnic minorities, indigenous people and migrants (Viet Nam); 131.89 Adopt vigorous legal and practical measures to stop and combat all forms of discrimination against persons from immigrant background, especially Muslims (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 131.90 Adopt concrete measures to prevent and combat all forms of discrimination against persons with an immigrant background (Rwanda); 131.91 Continue and strengthen efforts in preventing and combating all forms of discrimination faced by persons with a migratory background, in particular in the labour market, the housing sector, and in education and healthcare (Austria); 131.92 Continue to take concrete measures in order to eliminate discrimination in labour market faced by persons with immigrant background (Finland); 131.93 Adopt legislative and administrative measures to prevent any form of discrimination against minority ethnic groups in education, health, employment, housing and other areas (China); 131.94 Continue with measures undertaken to reduce discrimination against migrants and ethnic minorities (Argentina); 131.95 Intensify efforts to prevent discrimination against ethnic groups and promote equality, as well as prevent and combat discrimination against persons from immigrant backgrounds (Poland); 131.96 Take effective measures to improve the situation of the Roma and Romani/Taters minorities and ensure that all forms of discrimination against them in the provision of services are firmly opposed and appropriately sanctioned (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 131.97 Address concerns regarding discrimination against minorities, including Roma people and develop a comprehensive strategy to combat hate speech, including measures to effectively investigate and prosecute such offences (Pakistan);  131.98 Take concrete measures to promote tolerance and diversity in society and train law enforcement officials in detection and prosecution of hate speech both online and offline (India); 131.99 Take immediate measures to address discrimination against migrants, persons from immigrant backgrounds, asylum seekers and refugees in accessing public services, housing, the labour market and health, as was concerned by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, and intensify efforts, including through the adoption of a new action plan, to prevent and combat all forms of discrimination and to promote equality (Azerbaijan); 131.100 Take effective measures to curb discrimination and negative attitudes against migrants in Norway (Bangladesh); 131.101 Develop a comprehensive strategy to prevent, prohibit and combat hate speech, as a matter of priority, including measures to effectively investigate and prosecute related offences (Iran (Islamic Republic of )); 131.102 Raise awareness and promote tolerance and diversity in society, and train law enforcement officials in the detection and prosecution of hate speech (Israel); 131.103 Intensify the efforts to promote tolerance and diversity in the community and train law enforcement personnel to detect and prosecute perpetrators of hate speech (Bahrain); 131.104 Intensify efforts in the fight against hate speech and train law enforcement officials in this respect (Greece); 131.105 Take more effective measures to combat, or even eradicate hate crimes and speeches against minority groups in Norway, putting the accent on prevention of and follow-up to these acts (Côte d’Ivoire); 131.106 Raise awareness and promote tolerance and diversity in society and to ensure that violent acts, discrimination and hate speech are systematically investigated and the alleged perpetrators prosecuted (Azerbaijan); 131.107 Develop effective measures to combat incitement to hatred, in particular measures to effectively investigate and prosecute such manifestation of intolerance (Belarus); 131.108 Continue its efforts combating hate crime and glorification of criminals (Armenia); 131.109 Improve the collection of data on hate crimes and incidents, work to find the reasons behind the unreported cases, encourage victims to report and if necessary take measures to protect them (Turkey); 131.110 Further support existing initiatives aimed at collecting and generating disaggregated data on racism and discrimination (Brazil); 131.111 Take measures to put an end to discrimination against migrants or people from migrant backgrounds as well as asylum seekers and refugees, especially with regard to access to public services, housing, employment and health services (Tunisia); 131.112 Take appropriate measures to address discrimination against immigrants and asylum seekers in accessing to public services, housing, health and employment, in accordance with a concern expressed by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (India); 131.113 Intensify efforts to combat hate-crime, and domestic violence (Sudan); 131.114 Combat discrimination against children from minority groups, and children with disabilities (Jordan); 131.115 Combat discrimination against children belonging to minorities, indigenous people, and children with disabilities (Bahrain); 131.116 Ensure equal rights and opportunities for children of immigrants, Roma and indigenous people, investigate allegations of bullying ethnic minority children in schools and take effective measures to protect them against prejudice, violence and stigmatization (Uzbekistan); 131.117 Step up its efforts to combat racial profiling in all sectors, both public and private (Togo); 131.118 Further its efforts to address ethnic and racial profiling, particularly in stop and search operations carried out by police and customs and immigration officials (Malaysia); 131.119 Continue working to create a national preventive mechanism against torture (Guatemala); 131.120 Strengthen its efforts to provide assistance to victims of trafficking, such as access to education, vocational training and the labour market (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 131.121 Continue to combat trafficking in human beings and cooperate in the international framework in this respect (Romania); 131.122 Adopt a formalized national referral mechanism defining the roles and procedures of all institutions in the identification of victims of trafficking in human beings (Republic of Moldova); 131.123 Step up efforts to provide assistance to victims of trafficking and bring provisions of the Criminal Code, related to human trafficking, in conformity with the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings and recommendations of the Group of Experts on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings (Belarus); 131.124 Strengthen its efforts to prevent trafficking of minors by allocating sufficient resources to the immigration authorities to investigate every case of missing minors (Turkmenistan); 131.125 Take into account recommendations made by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women when it raised the increase in the number of women victims of trafficking, as well the prevalence of acts of violence against women (Nicaragua); 131.126 Enhance engagement in the region with regional and inter-regional partners to help build capacities in countering trafficking in persons, especially women and children (Philippines); 131.127 Investigate and punish ill-treatment, harassment and incitement to violence and hatred, to which minorities and other vulnerable groups are subjected (Mexico); 131.128 Continue to implement appropriate policies and programmes to combat violence and abuse against children, and ensure recovery and social integration for victims (State of Palestine); 131.129 Intensify measures aiming at realization of the rights of the child and prevention of violence against children (Algeria);  131.130 Strengthen efforts to combat and prevent domestic violence, including various forms of violence and sexual abuse against children (Azerbaijan); 131.131 Continue to promote a greater focus on combatting gender-based violence (Montenegro);  131.132 That the fight against domestic violence continues to be a priority for the Government (Paraguay); 131.133 Adopt more efficient measures to prevent domestic violence and all other forms of violence against and abuse of women and children (Viet Nam); 131.134 Strengthen efforts within the context of the fight against domestic violence, rapes, violence and sexual abuse of children, as Norway has already committed itself to do (Niger); 131.135 Take effective measures to deal with violence against women and girls (India); 131.136 Strengthen measures to investigate and prosecute cases of domestic violence and provide assistance to women and child victims of violence, in particular social rehabilitation (Sri Lanka); 131.137 Intensify efforts in implementing its national preventive strategy against gender-based violence (Philippines); 131.138 Continue to strengthen measures adopted to combat the scourge of gender-based violence, improving their effectiveness and increasing the protection of victims (Spain); 131.139 Improve detention conditions in the correctional institutions and temporary detention centers of asylum seekers (Russian Federation); 131.140 Ensure the compilation of detailed statistics on the use of solitary confinement (Ireland); 131.141 Adopt prompt measures aimed at ensuring an adequate assessment of the need for solitary confinement in each case of police detention, as well as ensuring a stricter implementation of the 48 hours statutory limit to the use of such a short term public order measure (Italy); 131.142 Provide for the necessary conditions to be able to limit detention in police cells to the 48-hour term as required by Norwegian law (Netherlands); 131.143 Reduce the duration of police custody and pre-trial detention, particularly in cases of solitary confinement (Switzerland); 131.144 Reduce the use of preventive detention and isolation of the detainees (France); 131.145 Review the system of preventative detention with regard to juveniles and adopt alternative measures in conformity with recommendations of United Nations treaty bodies (Uzbekistan); 131.146 Revise its system of detention to reduce the use of police custody for children, and ensure that police custody of children is a measure of last resort and for the shortest period of time possible (Canada); 131.147 Implement policies and programmes for the prevention, rehabilitation and social integration of victims of sexual exploitation and abuse, particularly minors (Costa Rica); 131.148 Seek to ensure the protection of all child victims and/or witnesses of crimes and comply with the United Nations Guidelines on Justice in Matters involving Child Victims and Witnesses of Crime (Libya); 131.149 Implement juvenile justice standards, in particular in regard to pre.trial detention of juveniles and the segregation of juveniles from adult prisoners (Austria); 131.150 Continue its efforts in the protection of all minors in conflict with law by taking into account the principles of best interest of the child, including the possibility of incorporating the principle of restorative justice in its juvenile justice system (Indonesia); 131.151 Facilitate access to justice by victims of sexual violence, particularly by reducing delay for hearings victims and improving care for these victims (France); 131.152 Guarantee that both women and men are equally paid for their services (Timor-Leste); 131.153 Continue its efforts to ensure equal pay to men and women for equal work (Benin); 131.154 Address the wage gap by further strengthening measures in ensuring that women and men receive equal pay for work of equal value (Malaysia);  131.155 Take concrete measures to address the wage-gap based on gender inequality in order to ensure that women and men receive equal pay for work of equal value (Rwanda); 131.156 Enhance measures to encourage participation of women in the labour market without gender discrimination, including by reducing the wage gap between men and women (Sri Lanka); 131.157 Multiply policies to increase the participation of women of migrant background in the labour market, as well as policies that make it possible to eliminate the wage gap between men and women (Paraguay); 131.158 Consider improving services at the Children’s Houses further, including by providing shelter for all children below 18 years of age, enhancing training programmes for professionals working with and protecting children, and expediting cases within the 14-day statutory deadline (Thailand); 131.159 Review the practices concerning the removal of children from their families by the Child Welfare Service, in the light of the best interest of the child and take necessary measures to maintain the special bond of the child with his/her cultural, ethnic and religious identity, after removal from the family (Turkey); 131.160 Ensure that emergency shelters and social housing units meet an adequate standard, especially for families with children (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 131.161 That the services of the Children’s Houses be available and accessible to all children up to the age of 18, and the due process of law be strengthened for victimized children by ensuring that they are interviewed within the 14-day statutory deadline (Iceland); 131.162 Elaborate and implement a substantially more effective strategy to fight child poverty (Kyrgyzstan); 131.163 Continue its efforts to support developing countries in their fight against poverty through its development assistances (Bangladesh); 131.164 Deploy further efforts in order to guarantee that any medical treatment to persons with intellectual disabilities or mental disorders be carried out in full respect of the human dignity of the patients concerned (Italy); 131.165 Take further concrete steps to reduce the use of coercion in the treatment and detention of persons with mental health issues or intellectual disabilities, including by improving the monitoring of mental health care institutions and developing voluntary alternatives to coercive interventions (New Zealand); 131.166 Ensure that coercive measures in mental health institutions are only applied when necessary and in a proportionate manner (Switzerland); 131.167 Ensure that criteria for compulsory treatment and detention in legislation and in practice are non-discriminatory and focused on safety, and remove any criteria referring to disability or “serious mental disorder” (New Zealand); 131.168 Further improve training given to health professionals on inter.culturalism (Portugal); 131.169 Effectively to implement the new regulations on health services and medical care that gives the right to all persons in the country to receive urgent medical attention and be examined by specialized care services (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 131.170 Redouble efforts to reduce abuse of drugs and other psychotropic substances, in particular by children, adolescents and youths (Costa Rica); 131.171 Strengthen efforts to reduce drug abuse, as recommended by the Committee on the Rights of the Child (Botswana); 131.172 Ensure the right to education for Roma Children and intensify measures taken to remedy the difficulties encountered by Roma and Romani/Taters children in the education system; and find solutions suited to the particular lifestyle of Roma (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 131.173 Take additional measures to ensure the full enjoyment of the right to education by children with an immigrant background and eliminate discrimination in access to education for them (Kyrgyzstan); 131.174 Guarantee access to primary and secondary education to all children, including migrant children and asylum seekers (Mexico); 131.175 Take additional measures to ensure the full enjoyment of the right to education by children with an immigrant background (Portugal); 131.176 To pursue in its efforts to ensure that indigenous peoples enjoy their right to education (Timor-Leste); 131.177 Continue its efforts to allocate sufficient pedagogical resources to support the right to education of the indigenous peoples of Norway (Benin); 131.178 Take appropriate measures to effectively support the cultures of persons belonging to national minorities, in particular by preserving their languages (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 131.179 Place special emphasis, in its general policy of protection of persons with disabilities, on the protection of children with disabilities, who are more vulnerable to discrimination (Spain); 131.180 Continue strengthening the provisions guaranteeing human rights to persons belonging to ethnic minorities (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia); 131.181 Adopt measure to promote and facilitate the use of indigenous peoples’ languages (Mexico); 131.182 Strengthen the measures to protect the indigenous populations in Norway and guarantee them a full access to natural resources (Côte d’Ivoire); 131.183 Adopt and ratify the Nordic Sami Convention by year 2016 (Denmark); 131.184 Undertake further steps to preserve and promote the traditional means of livelihood of the Sami people, such as reindeer grazing and fishing (Slovenia); 131.185 Sustain its dialogue with indigenous groups affected by the intensified state’s mining activities in the North and to reach an agreement that is acceptable for both sides (Germany); 131.186 Ensure that the activities of transnational corporations and other business enterprises do not have a negative impact on the enjoyment of rights of indigenous peoples, and other ethnic groups (South Africa);131.187 Strengthen protection and promote the rights of the Sami people, including in terms of teaching their language and preserving their culture and traditions (Uzbekistan); 131.188 Adopt effective measures to protect Sami’s linguistic right and culture (China); 131.189 Strengthen measures for the promotion and protection of human rights of minorities such as the Roma and other vulnerable groups (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 131.190 Continue pursuing appropriate, efficient policies aimed at further improving the access of Roma to education and consider the adoption of additional measures, as recommended by the national human rights institutions (Czech Republic); 131.191 Reformulate the plan of action to improve the living conditions of the Roma community which began in 2009 in order to ensure that it includes fundamental issues such as the eradication of illiteracy and providing Roma children with inclusive and quality education (Ecuador); 131.192 Further develop its integration policy of migrants and national minorities into the society (Armenia); 131.193 Revisit existing legislation and programmes with the aim to enhance social protection for all migrants, reduce xenophobia, and improve public perception of migrants (Philippines); 131.194 Strengthen migration policies, based on the respect of the human rights of all migrants (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 131.195 Develop campaigns to raise immigrants’ awareness of their rights, particularly with regard to their rights to access to health care services (Portugal); 131.196 Reassess involuntary return practices and asylum processes, particularly for minors, in order to guarantee refugees the full protection accorded by the law (United States of America); 131.197 Take further steps to integrate the best interests of the child at all stages of the asylum and migration process, in line with human rights obligations under the CRC, and to ensure special protection for unaccompanied asylum-seeking children (Austria); 131.198 Continue and strengthen efforts to ensure respect for the best interest of children when enforcing public policies on the rights of migrants (Brazil); 131.199 Ensure the best interest of the child in all matters related to immigration (Chile); 131.200 Take measures to prevent minors from disappearing from reception centres by identifying and ensuring the protection of children at risk of being trafficked (Finland); 131.201 Continue giving top priority to the issue of unaccompanied asylum-seeking minors placed in asylum centres and protecting them from disappearances, including providing the necessary resources, enhancing measures to quickly identify and bolstering previous efforts in this regard (Germany); 131.202 Place the responsibility for all unaccompanied minor asylum seekers up to the age of 18 years with the Child Welfare Services (Hungary); 131.203 Consider further strategies aimed at effectively addressing the situation of undocumented asylum seekers and the return of foreigners to States in internal armed or generalized violence on humanitarian grounds (Sierra Leone). 132. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex 
[English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of Norway was headed by Mr. Børge Brende, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and composed of the following members: • Mr. Steffen Kongstad, Ambassador Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of Norway; • Mr. Petter Wille, Ambassador, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Norway;  • Ms.	 Kristin Ryan, Deputy Director General, Ministry of Local Government and Modernisation, Norway; • Ms. Thea Bull Skarstein, Deputy Director General, Ministry of Children, Equality and Social Inclusion, Norway; • Ms. Harriet E. Berg, Minister Counsellor, Permanent Mission of Norway; • Ms. Helle Aase Falkenberg, Legal Adviser, Ministry of Justice and Public Security, Norway; • Ms. Monica Furnes, Senior Advisor, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Norway; • Ms. Trine Heimerback, Senior Adviser, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Norway; • Ms. Anne-Li Norderhaug Ferguson, Senior Adviser, Ministry of Justice and Public Security, Norway; • Mr. Jan Austad, Senior Adviser, Ministry of Justice and Public Security, Norway; • Ms. Anne Kari Braathen, Senior Adviser, Ministry of Justice and Public Security, Norway; • Mr. Sjur Øverbø Andersen, Senior Adviser, Ministry of Health and Care Services, Norway; • Ms. Astrid Sehl, Adviser, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Norway; • Ms. Hanne Krogenæs, Adviser, Ministry of Children, Equality and Social Inclusion, Norway; • Ms. Mali Gulbrandsen Asmyhr, Adviser, Ministry of Children, Equality and Social Inclusion, Norway; • Mr. Erling Hoem, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of Norway; • Ms. Gita Simonsen, Trainee, Permanent Mission of Norway; and • Ms. Elin Geitle, Intern, Permanent Mission of Norway. 