Distr.: General 27 June 2014 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-seventh session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on  the Universal Periodic Review* Qatar * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.14-06738  (E) *1406738* Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–121 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–17 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 18–121 6 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 122–126 14 Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 26 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its nineteenth session from 28 April to 9 May 2014. The review of Qatar was held at the 15th meeting, on 7 May 2014. The delegation of Qatar was headed by Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdulrahman bin Jassim Al-Thani, Assistant Minister for Foreign Affairs for International Cooperation. At its 18th meeting, held on 9 May 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on Qatar. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Qatar: Cuba, India and Italy. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Qatar: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/19/QAT/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/19/QAT/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/19/QAT/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, the Czech Republic, Germany, Liechtenstein, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Qatar through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR). I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The head of delegation said that it was a pleasure to meet the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review. Qatar appreciated the important role played by the Working Group in helping States to better fulfil their obligations under international human rights law. The periodic review process represented a valuable opportunity for Qatar to make a critical and proper analysis of the situation, in order to improve and develop its internal practices. 6. By a decision of 2010, the Council of Ministers had requested the committee that prepared the initial report to continue its work and had entrusted it with the preparation of subsequent reports and with following up the recommendations of the Working Group. That committee was chaired by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and its 10 other members were drawn from various ministries and councils. The consultation process was broad, involving coordination and cooperation with related stakeholders. 7. For Qatar, the promotion and protection of human rights was a strategic choice that constituted the backbone of the comprehensive development policy enshrined in the Qatar National Vision 2030, which involved constitutional, economic, social and cultural reforms. That policy included important topics related to key human rights issues in the areas of education, health, the environment, expatriate workers’ rights, women’s empowerment and child rights. The aim of the National Development Strategy (2011-2016) was to transform the objectives of the National Vision 2030 into reality in the years to come. 8. In a short period, Qatar had become a State in which the rule of law prevailed, with institutions that upheld the rights and maintained the dignity of all. The Government responded swiftly and effectively to all human rights issues and concerns, in support of its endeavours to achieve human development, to develop democracy and civilization, and to maintain the prosperity and well-being enjoyed by Qatar. It considered that many of the recommendations presented during the interactive dialogue of its first review had already been implemented or were in the process of being implemented. 9. The most significant developments since the adoption of the initial report included the amendment by Qatar of the Criminal Code by the introduction of an explicit definition of torture that was fully consistent with article 1 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, in addition to its enactment of the Trafficking in Persons Act No. 15 of 2011, to protect victims and enhance international cooperation against human trafficking, and its espousal of the Arab Initiative to Build National Capacities to Combat Human Trafficking in the Arab Countries. Its commitment to that Initiative was evident in the financial support that it had offered, which amounted to US$ 6 million. In addition, Qatar had ratified the Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions. Furthermore, it had established the Qatari National Commission for International Humanitarian Law, recognizing the importance of applying the principles of international humanitarian law in order to protect victims of conflict. Qatar had also established the National Committee for Occupational Health and Safety, in cooperation with experts from the International Labour Organization (ILO), in addition to the Committee on Climate Change and Clean Development and the Qatar Committee for Alliance of Civilizations. It had established the Qatar Foundation for Protection and Social Rehabilitation, a private foundation for the public good that included the Qatar Foundation for the Protection of Children and Women, the Qatar Foundation for Combating Human Trafficking and the Social Rehabilitation Centre. 10. Qatar had continued its policy of openness towards hosting international conferences and forums on development, democracy, human rights and the promotion of a culture of peace. Every year, it hosted the Doha Forum and the Doha Conference for Interfaith Dialogue, as well as the U.S.–Islamic World Forum. It had hosted the Fourth Global Forum of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations in 2011 and, in April 2014, the preparatory conference for the Sixth Global Forum, to be held in Indonesia in August 2014. In addition, it had hosted the eighteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the thirteenth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. Moreover, it would host the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, to be held from 12 to 19 April 2015 in Doha. 11. Qatar attached great importance to international cooperation and deployed considerable human and financial resources in that field. In addition, it offered development assistance to developing countries around the world. In 2011 and 2012, it had provided humanitarian and development assistance (governmental and non-governmental) amounting to over 3 billion Qatar riyals (QR). It provided assistance to 100 countries, in particular to least developed countries, to help them achieve the Millennium Development Goals by 2015. The contributions of Qatar also included humanitarian and development initiatives, such as: “Hope For”, an initiative to improve the effectiveness and coordination of military and civil defences in response to natural disasters; “Protecting Education in Insecurity and Armed Conflict”, an initiative to support and promote the right to education in crisis, conflict and war zones; “Al-Fakhurah”, an initiative to support and protect students and schools in conflict zones, particularly in Gaza; “Silatech”, an initiative to expand employment and business opportunities for young people throughout the Arab world; and “Reach Out to Asia (ROTA)”, an initiative to enable communities in Asia to overcome obstacles and establish links in order to achieve education for all. 12. Since February 2010, Qatar had taken serious steps to implement the recommendations of the Working Group at the national and the international levels in order to promote human rights, based on its enduring desire to improve the human rights situation in Qatar and to strengthen constructive cooperation with the relevant special procedures. That desire had been confirmed when Qatar had accepted the recommendation to extend an open and standing invitation to all special procedures mandate holders. Qatar had received a visit from the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants in November 2013 and, in January 2014, had welcomed the visit of the Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers. It had received the visit of a delegation of the European Parliament Subcommittee on Human Rights in March 2014, as well as the visits of numerous non.governmental human rights organizations. Since May 2010, Qatar had continued to strengthen its relationship with the OHCHR through bilateral consultations. Moreover, Qatar continued to support the United Nations Human Rights Training and Documentation Centre for South-West Asia and the Arab Region in Doha. 13. Qatar faced particular challenges as it underwent a rapid and historic transition towards complete and comprehensive development. It had recorded unprecedented rates of growth and economic recovery, and had been ranked first among the countries of North Africa and the Middle East and eighteenth on the global scale by the World Economic Forum in the Human Capital Report 2013. Although there had been numerous developments in Qatar with regard to the promotion and protection of human rights in terms of legislation, institutions and awareness, some temporary obstacles remained. Those included the unprecedented population increase of over 100 per cent in recent years, and the fact that legislative and institutional developments were recent and that Qatar had only recently dealt with international human rights mechanisms. 14. Qatar emphasized its appreciation for the contribution of expatriate workers, whom it considered to be real partners in the development and advancement project pursued by the State. 15. In the context of enhancing and strengthening the legislative structure, Qatar was conducting a comprehensive review of labour laws and of procedures and policies to promote and protect the rights of workers, citizens and residents in accordance with international standards. The competent authorities were also considering a draft regulatory mechanism for domestic workers. In addition, the Entry, Exit, Residence and Sponsorship of Expatriates Act and the Labour Code were under review, with a view to their being developed. 16. Qatar was considering accession to both the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. 17. The delegation of Qatar was ready to work to develop appropriate strategies and mechanisms to follow up on the recommendations that the Working Group would put forward. Qatar realized that much more needed to be done; therefore, it would continue to build on and improve its achievements through the exchange of experiences, taking advantage of international best practices. Lastly, it should be emphasized that political will and a supportive environment for the promotion and protection of human rights existed in Qatar. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 18. During the interactive dialogue, 84 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 19. Slovenia welcomed the progress achieved with regard to women’s rights in Qatar but remained concerned about discrimination in law and violence against women, including within the family. It shared the concerns of other delegations with regard to the promotion and protection of the rights of migrants. 20. Somalia noted the progress achieved in Qatar since the first cycle. It welcomed the economic development achieved and the successful policies pursued in the legislative, institutional and other sectors. 21. Spain congratulated Qatar on the establishment of its National Human Rights Committee (NHRC) and other human rights institutions, and noted the legislation introduced to protect private sector and migrant workers. It welcomed the de facto moratorium on the death penalty since 2003.  22. The State of Palestine welcomed the withdrawal of the general reservation to articles 21 and 22 and of the reservations to articles 1 and 16 of the Convention against Torture. It encouraged Qatar to take the recommendation of NHRC into account, and welcomed the awareness campaigns conducted on women’s and children’s rights. 23. The Sudan applauded the steps taken by Qatar to implement the previous recommendations of the Working Group, and expressed appreciation for its efforts to help Arab countries through development projects such as the ROTA initiative to support communities in Asia. It also commended the role played by Qatar to support peace in Darfur.  24. Sweden welcomed the ratification by Qatar of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the establishment of an institution for women’s empowerment and efforts to promote gender equality. It noted that the Cybercrime Act of 2013 could restrict freedom of expression, and that migrant workers were vulnerable as a result of the sponsorship (kafala) system.  25. Switzerland expressed concern that migrant workers were still subject to human rights violations. Although 28 per cent of women in Qatar were victims of domestic violence, there were no laws to protect them. 26. The Syrian Arab Republic noted a lack of objectivity in reporting. It expressed concerns regarding the role of charitable institutions in Qatar in the absence of transparency and, also, regarding delays in the ratification of international treaties. 27. Thailand applauded the steps taken to promote human rights in Qatar and the assistance that Qatar offered to other countries, including as a migrant-receiving country. It welcomed the commitment of Qatar to providing affordable health care, as well as the establishment of the Qatar Foundation for the Protection of Children and Women. 28. Tunisia welcomed the steps taken by Qatar since 2009 to establish a standing committee to prepare the national report for the UPR process and to improve the national legislative framework. It took note of the establishment of various national plans and strategies, such as the National Vision 2030. 29. Turkey commended the progress achieved by Qatar in human rights in the context of the reform process and the National Vision 2030. It highlighted measures to improve gender equality and to strengthen the status of women in society, in addition to the lively debate on expatriate employee rights. 30. Turkmenistan noted the establishment of the Supreme Council for Family Affairs, in addition to the adoption of legislative and policy measures to combat domestic violence and the exploitation of women and children. 31. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland noted the progress made in combating human trafficking, providing protection against torture and increasing opportunities for women. While it welcomed efforts to promote migrant workers’ rights, it urged Qatar to reform the kafala system. It remained concerned that there was no specific law criminalizing domestic violence.  32. Portugal welcomed the establishment of the NHRC and the standing invitation extended by Qatar to the special procedures. It noted that the Qatar National Vision 2030 reaffirmed the need to strengthen women’s capacities and to empower women. 33. Uruguay recognized the cooperation of Qatar with the special procedures of the Human Rights Council. 34. Uzbekistan noted the achievements of Qatar in promoting human, social and economic rights and welcomed the adoption of the National Development Strategy 2011-2016. It noted the strengthening of the role of women in society and the protection of children’s rights. 35. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela recognized the progress made by Qatar in implementing the recommendations of the first UPR cycle. It noted the introduction of legislative and governance measures to improve social development and welcomed the Education and Training Strategy 2011-2016. 36. Viet Nam noted the measures taken to address human trafficking, to prevent torture and to improve health care and education. It noted with satisfaction the creation of a committee to consider accession to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. 37. Yemen welcomed the improvements made to the legislative framework for human rights in Qatar, including the adoption of the Health Insurance Act, the Criminal Code and the Human Trafficking Act. It also welcomed initiatives to protect women, persons with disabilities and children, in addition to the humanitarian and developmental support provided by Qatar to least developed countries. 38. Afghanistan noted the establishment of the Qatar Foundation for Social Action to monitor human rights bodies and institutions, as well as the efforts made by Qatar to raise public awareness of human rights and to protect the rights of migrant workers. 39. Albania noted the adoption of legal and administrative measures, including the Human Trafficking Act and the Health and Education Fund Act, and of various sectoral strategies in the area of integrated social development. 40. Algeria welcomed the improvements made to the legislative framework, including the adoption of acts to prevent human trafficking. It also welcomed the launch of national strategies to promote human rights. 41. Angola noted the progress achieved in education, health and employment, as well as in the protection of children’s rights. It asked about measures taken to prohibit all forms of corporal punishment. 42. Argentina congratulated Qatar on the establishment of the NHRC, as well as on the implementation of the National Development Strategy 2011-2016 and on improvements in women’s rights. It encouraged Qatar to provide greater legal protection for migrant workers. 43. Armenia expressed appreciation for the legislative and institutional initiatives taken by Qatar to improve human rights, its policy of promoting tolerance and diversity and its programmes to raise awareness of human rights. It was concerned that Qatar had not yet ratified some international human rights instruments, including the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. 44. Australia commended Qatar on its issuance of a standing invitation to all special procedures mandate holders. It welcomed the efforts of Qatar to improve the situation of migrant workers, and the interest it had shown in acceding to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. 45. Austria commended Qatar on its efforts to ratify human rights treaties, its cooperation with the United Nations and its promotion of press freedom. It remained concerned that migrant workers could be prevented from leaving the country by their employers. 46. Azerbaijan noted that Qatar had strengthened its normative and institutional human rights framework. It expressed appreciation for the endorsement by Qatar of the 2011-2014 Strategic Plan of the NHRC and its adoption of the Human Trafficking Act in 2011. 47. Bangladesh praised Qatar for the progress made in empowering women, for its legislation on health and education, and for the protection of the family and children under the Overall Family Strategy. It wished to know how Qatar aimed to improve the situation of foreign workers. 48. Belgium welcomed the follow-up by Qatar on implementation of the recommendations of the first UPR cycle and its cooperation with the Human Rights Council. It expressed its continuing concern in respect of the situation of migrant workers. 49. Benin congratulated Qatar on its efforts to implement the recommendations of the first cycle, notably through action against human trafficking, the creation of the Health and Education Fund and the adoption of the Health and Social Security Act. 50. Brazil noted that Qatar had withdrawn reservations to the Convention against Torture in the context of follow-up to the previous recommendations, and encouraged additional progress in women’s rights and gender equality. It expressed concern at the situation of migrant workers. 51. Brunei Darussalam welcomed the continued commitment of Qatar to human rights, as well as the legislative measures taken, the development of the National Vision 2030 and the National Development Strategy 2011-2016.  52. Burkina Faso noted the progress achieved by Qatar in implementing the recommendations that it had accepted in 2010, including by the adoption of the Human Trafficking Act of 2011 and the introduction of a definition of torture in the Criminal Code. It noted the contribution made by Qatar to combating poverty through development aid. 53. Canada asked about tangible steps taken to implement the recommendations accepted by Qatar following the previous review regarding women’s rights and the prevention of discrimination and violence against women. It encouraged Qatar to pursue its efforts to prevent and punish domestic violence in order to meet targets by 2016. 54. Chad welcomed the adjustments made by Qatar with regard to human rights pursuant to the recommendations of the first cycle, including the introduction of anti.human trafficking legislation and the creation of a national commission for the implementation of international humanitarian law. 55. Chile commended the commitment of Qatar to the promotion and protection of human rights and its efforts to implement Human Rights Council resolutions. 56. China appreciated the efforts expended by Qatar to promote and protect human rights in the framework of sustainable social development, in addition to its establishment of the National Vision 2030 and the active provision of assistance to developing countries. 57. Comoros commended Qatar on its awareness-raising campaigns on human rights, its abrogation of laws that discriminated against women, its promotion of a culture of peace, its financial support of human rights organizations and its active provision of assistance to developing countries. 58. Costa Rica commended Qatar on the measures it had taken to improve human rights, and encouraged it to ensure the protection of all workers in the preparations for the 2022 International Federation of Association Football (FIFA) World Cup. It expressed concern in respect of a bill that would prohibit homosexuals and transvestites from living or working in Qatar. 59. Côte d’Ivoire welcomed the fact that Qatar had implemented a strategic plan to strengthen human rights and conducted awareness-raising campaigns, and noted its promotion of the rights of women, children, persons with disabilities and the elderly. 60. Cuba commended Qatar on the National Vision 2030, as well as on the provision of free health care, education, water and electricity and the steps taken to improve the living conditions of children with disabilities. It noted the assistance provided by Qatar to developing countries. 61. The head of delegation said that he wished to respond to the allegations and accusations made by the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. 62. The Syrian Arab Republic raised a point of order, indicating that the Syrian statement had been objective. In fact, it had displayed restraint and adhered to the principles of UPR since no mention had been made of the inhuman role played by Qatar in the Syrian Arab Republic. The representative of the Syrian Arab Republic requested the President to urge Qatar to refrain from using provocative language and to respond objectively to the Syrian statement. 63. The President reminded delegations that the UPR procedure required them to focus on the human rights situation in the country under review. The procedure was based on reports and recommendations, and it was essential to avoid confrontation regarding bilateral issues. 64. The representative of Qatar said that the Qatar Foundation for Protection and Social Rehabilitation provided legal guidance and counselling to women victims of violence, as well as assistance in filing complaints. Special offices had been set up in health centres and hospitals to receive complaints of violence and to provide support. Victims were also provided with free legal support. Women and child victims could seek refuge in special shelters. A hotline for victims of violence operated 24 hours a day. The Foundation recorded such cases in a database, preserving confidentiality. The services provided to victims were taken into account in formulating policies and conducting research, with a view to promoting reform and enhancing rehabilitation and legal assistance.  65. Workers could file complaints with the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs against employers who failed to comply with working conditions. If an amicable settlement could not be reached, the case was referred to the competent court. Some 8,000 complaints had been filed in 2012, of which some 6,500 had been settled and some 600 had been referred to the courts. The corresponding figures for 2013 were approximately 10,000, 8,000 and 600 cases, respectively. The Labour Code set out the basic rules governing the establishment of trade unions. The demographic composition of the country and the ratio of migrant workers to Qatari workers were taken into account. Forced labour was prohibited under article 43 of the Labour Code. Qatar had ratified the ILO Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29) and the ILO Abolition of Forced Labour Convention, 1957 (No. 105). The Human Trafficking Act (Act No. 15 of 2011) prohibited forced labour and contemporary forms of slavery, prescribing penalties of up to 15 years’ imprisonment and fines of up to QR 300,000. 66. Ministerial Decision No. 15 of 2005 and articles 104 and 105 of the Labour Code required employers to provide a first aid kit for every 25 employees, and required those employing more than 100 employees to provide a medical service. Routine tests should be conducted free of charge for employees engaged in hazardous work. 67. The Nationality Act was applied in accordance with the Constitution. The legal status of Qatari women married to foreigners in no way interfered with their enjoyment of human rights. The Act accorded priority in the acquisition of citizenship to children born of a Qatari mother, and recognized children born of unknown parents as Qatari nationals. 68. Serious steps were being taken at the highest level to amend the law on the kafala system in order to align it with international human rights law and the rights of migrants. 69. The age of criminal responsibility was 7 years. Cases involving minors were heard by juvenile courts, which applied juvenile legislation. Special police officers and prosecutors dealt with such cases. 70. With regard to sexual freedoms and same-sex marriage, sharia law was the main source of Qatari legislation, pursuant to article 1 of the Constitution. The corresponding principles were reflected in articles 279 to 289 of the Criminal Code. 71. The death penalty was applicable to anyone who killed another person with premeditation under the highly specific circumstances defined in articles 300 and 302 of the Criminal Code. However, the death penalty had not been imposed since 2003. 72. The Czech Republic commended Qatar on its efforts to advance human rights, notably for extending a standing invitation to all special procedures. 73. Denmark encouraged Qatar to strengthen independent monitoring systems, especially for detention facilities. It expressed concern about the lack of rights for and legal protection of immigrant workers, and about reported exploitation and abuse of domestic and construction workers. 74. Ecuador welcomed the creation of mechanisms in Qatar to protect women, children and the elderly and of institutions for social assistance, in addition to the importance attached by Qatar to the development of human rights plans, programmes and strategies with civil society and with public and private national institutions and to sharing experiences and information at the national and international levels. 75. France welcomed the delegation of Qatar and made several recommendations.  76. Germany acknowledged the first steps taken by Qatar to heed the recommendations of the previous cycle, most notably the recent adoption of labour welfare standards aimed at protecting workers’ rights. 77. Ghana commended Qatar for conducting programmes to promote a culture of human rights, for issuing a standing invitation to the special procedures and for amending its Criminal Code to align its definition of torture with that in the Convention against Torture. 78. Greece noted positively the numerous efforts of Qatar to promote women’s rights and asked about the steps it envisaged taking next to advance women’s participation in public life. Recognizing the measures that had been taken, it asked about the results of the implementation of the Human Trafficking Act and the associated National Plan. 79. India welcomed the reforms introduced and the measures taken by Qatar, including on human trafficking, health, education, the environment, greater protection for children and empowerment of women. It looked forward to further initiatives on the protection and promotion of migrant workers’ rights and noted the commitment of Qatar to human rights through its provision of aid and assistance. 80. Indonesia welcomed measures to promote a culture of human rights, family values and migrant rights, particularly female domestic workers’ rights, and expressed the hope that Qatar would continue to promote family values at the international level.  81. Ireland welcomed the cooperation of Qatar with the special procedures but expressed concern at reported widespread violations of migrant workers’ rights in the preparations for the FIFA World Cup, at the kafala system and the denial of freedom of movement, and at restrictions faced by civil society organizations. 82. The Islamic Republic of Iran commended Qatar on its integrated social development, noting the attention paid to improving the situation of women, children and persons with disabilities and measures taken to consolidate the family and its essential role in the community. 83. Italy expressed particular appreciation for the medium-term perspective adopted by Qatar, including through the National Vision 2030 and measures to reform and debate the kafala system, in particular in view of projects related to the FIFA World Cup. It welcomed the de facto moratorium on capital punishment and the progress achieved on freedom of expression, but expressed concern at the current debate on a new media law. 84. Japan noted the measures taken to promote women’s participation and protect children’s rights and encouraged Qatar to continue its efforts to advance the legal and social status of women. It appreciated the cooperation of Qatar with international human rights mechanisms, and its commitment to improving the living conditions of migrant workers. 85. Jordan noted the progress achieved in economic, social and cultural rights in Qatar, particularly the rights to health and education. It welcomed efforts to strengthen the legal and institutional human rights framework by the adoption and the amendment of laws on matters such as torture, trafficking and health. 86. Kuwait appreciated the commitment, efforts and achievements of Qatar in the field of migrant workers’ rights, including the adoption of laws and procedures. It commended Qatar for the introduction of measures to enforce the minimum wage for migrant workers, and for conducting awareness programmes in that regard. 87. Lebanon expressed appreciation for the efforts of Qatar to promote human rights and the progress achieved in that regard at the legislative and institutional levels, and in the implementation of previously accepted recommendations. 88. Libya recognized the progress achieved by Qatar towards improving human rights by its ratification of a number of international treaties. It noted the progress achieved in protecting the rights of children and persons with disabilities under the national strategic plan. 89. Malaysia commended Qatar on the enactment and amendment of human rights legislation and welcomed the progress made in combating human trafficking. It encouraged Qatar to continue to implement policies and programmes designed to enhance and promote human rights. 90. Maldives congratulated Qatar on the measures taken to combat trafficking in persons and protect trafficking victims. It welcomed the amendments introduced to the Criminal Code, particularly the inclusion of a definition of torture, as well as efforts to mitigate the impact of climate change. 91. Mauritania noted the progress made by Qatar in protecting the rights of women, children and migrant workers, and the steps taken to combat human trafficking. It welcomed the establishment of national institutions to promote human rights. 92. Norway expressed concerns over the working and living conditions of foreign workers, particularly female domestic workers in private households, and discrimination against women. It appreciated the fact that no executions had been carried out since 1995. 93. Montenegro noted the establishment of the NHRC and the introduction of legislative reforms to eliminate discrimination against women and promote gender equality. It asked about the plans of Qatar to criminalize all forms of violence against women, including marital rape. 94. Morocco commended Qatar on its achievements in improving the human rights situation, on initiatives to protect women and children and on its strengthening of human rights legislation and the institutional framework, in particular by the establishment of the Supreme Judicial Council and the Qatar Foundation to Combat Human Trafficking, and for its efforts to prevent torture. 95. Nepal expressed appreciation for the legislative and institutional measures introduced by Qatar, which were linked to the National Vision 2030 and the National Development Strategy. It commended Qatar for the efforts made to improve economic, social and cultural rights, particularly in respect of women’s empowerment and the protection of children’s rights and the rights of persons with disabilities. 96. The Netherlands welcomed the cooperation of Qatar with the special procedures. The greatest human rights challenge would be the position and rights of migrant workers in Qatar, an issue that commanded attention worldwide. 97. Nicaragua commended the progress achieved and measures taken to implement the recommendations from the first review, particularly with regard to human trafficking, health, education, social assistance and development. 98. The Niger welcomed the measures taken to promote gender equality, guarantee women’s rights, strengthen the family and protect children’s rights. It encouraged Qatar to continue to develop its institutions and legislation. 99. Nigeria noted the establishment of the Foundation for Social Action and urged Qatar to broaden the Foundation’s mandate to include raising public awareness of human rights. It invited Qatar to expedite the incorporation of international conventions into the national legislation. 100. Mexico welcomed the cooperation of Qatar with international human rights protection mechanisms, including its withdrawal of reservations to the Convention against Torture, the recent visits by the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants and the Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers, and the amendment of the Criminal Code to include a definition of torture. 101. Oman welcomed improvements to the legislative and administrative frameworks based on the Qatar National Vision 2030 and other strategies. It noted the efforts expended in respect of education, health and the rights of persons with disabilities.  102. Pakistan appreciated the incorporation of key socioeconomic indicators in the Qatar National Vision 2030 and the National Development Strategy. It noted the efforts expended by Qatar to protect the rights of women and migrant workers, to combat domestic violence and to cooperate with international human rights protection mechanisms. 103. The Philippines highlighted the assistance provided by Qatar to developing countries. It encouraged Qatar to continue supporting international and regional partners to combat human trafficking, and urged it to step up implementation of policies and programmes aimed at promoting workers’ rights in accordance with international standards. 104. The United States of America urged Qatar to take action against the violation of labour laws and to strengthen workers’ rights. It expressed concern that individuals were imprisoned simply for exercising their freedom of expression, as well as concern about media restrictions and censorship. 105. The Republic of Moldova asked what measures had been taken to provide migrant workers with legal protection and access to justice. While welcoming legal and institutional developments in Qatar, it noted the concerns of treaty bodies about gaps in fully addressing the issue of human trafficking. 106. Romania asked about steps being taken to revise education laws to protect and ensure the right to education for all in accordance with the National Vision 2030 and the National Development Strategy 2011-2016. 107. The Russian Federation noted that some progress had been achieved since the first review. It also noted the existence of some inconsistencies with international human rights standards, including in the area of gender equality. 108. Rwanda noted the progress achieved in human rights, especially the adoption of legislation on human trafficking, education and health care. It commended the National Vision 2030 and appreciated that it included women’s empowerment and children’s rights. 109. Senegal noted that Qatar had acceded to various international and regional human rights instruments and had endeavoured to ensure socioeconomic rights and to combat human trafficking. It encouraged Qatar to continue with its positive efforts. 110. Sierra Leone commended Qatar for the legislation enacted and awareness-raising campaigns conducted to combat human trafficking. It urged Qatar to make further efforts to protect the rights of migrant workers, in particular female domestic workers, and to strengthen accountability mechanisms to dissuade perpetrators of violence against women. 111. Singapore noted that significant progress had been made in advancing the role of women in society and that measures had been taken to ensure the inclusion of persons with disabilities in society. 112. Sri Lanka noted developments in human rights and asked what efforts were being made to protect and ensure the right to health for all. It noted progress in the promotion of migrant workers’ rights, including those of female domestic workers. 113. Eritrea congratulated Qatar for discharging its obligations to promote and protect the basic human rights of its people, and for its focus on UPR as the main mechanism for doing so. 114. The head of delegation said that human rights principles were incorporated in school curricula at all levels as subjects, exercises or illustrative examples. International instruments, such as those aimed at combating discrimination against women, were used as reference material. A framework for inculcating values such as tolerance, rejection of violence, democracy and freedom of expression, and a framework for family education focusing on health had been prepared. Workshops and symposiums had been organized for teaching and administrative personnel, and leaflets and handbooks for teachers and students had been disseminated. Measures had been taken to ban corporal punishment in schools. A ministerial decree adopted in 2013 prohibited the use of violence of any kind in schools. 115. Two hundred inspectors were employed in eight regional offices to ensure that workers’ rights, including those of migrant workers, were respected in all workplaces. The authorities coordinated with the Central Bank to ensure that appropriate wages were paid. A hotline had been set up for workers wishing to complain or obtain information, and a guide for migrant workers had been published. Full social and medical protection was provided. 116. The Human Trafficking Act of 2011 provided for the protection and rehabilitation of victims. Victims and witnesses were also protected in the event of legal proceedings. The National Plan 2010-2015 provided for 25 programmes, 85 per cent of which had been completed. The National Strategy for Combating Human Trafficking had also been updated. A further initiative was aimed at training criminal justice and enforcement personnel and at forging links between all stakeholders involved in combating human trafficking. 117. Qatar had withdrawn its general reservation to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, and limited its general reservation to articles 2 and 14 of the Convention. It had withdrawn its reservations to articles 21 and 22 of the Convention against Torture and amended its general reservation thereto within the framework of articles 1 and 16 of the Convention, and had completely refrained from entering general reservations upon its accession to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. 118. Qatar believed in freedom of expression in the media and on social networks, except in the case of violations of moral principles and sharia law. 119. All measures taken against the poet Mohammed Al-`Ajami were consistent with international rules. Mr. Al-Ajami had been given a fair trial and allowed to appeal the judgement to the Court of Appeal and the Court of Cassation. 120. Some statements and recommendations had violated UPR principles, as the interactive dialogue should be conducted in a transparent manner and should not be selective or politicized. 121. The comments and recommendations made during the review would be taken into consideration by Qatar, which was fully committed to enhancing cooperation and consultation with all United Nations human rights mechanisms and to supporting the efforts of the Human Rights Council to realize its noble objectives. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations.. 122. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue or listed below enjoy the support of Qatar. It was recommended that Qatar: 122.1 Continue its ongoing review of national laws to ensure that they are in line with its international human rights law obligations (Turkmenistan); 122.2 Continue efforts in the field of legislative and institutional developments (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); ** The conclusions and recommendations will not be edited. 122.3  Strengthen its national human rights institutions (Somalia);  122.4  Continue to strengthen national human rights mechanisms (Nepal);  122.5  Enhance efforts to promote human rights (Sudan);  122.6  Continue further improvement of the protection and promotion of  human rights in the country (Azerbaijan); 122.7 Continue its efforts to strengthen the normative and institutional framework for the protection and promotion of human rights (Azerbaijan); 122.8 Continue the implementation of the National Development Strategy 2011-2016 in order to realize the objectives of the Qatar National Vision 2030 (Somalia); 122.9 Continue actions for the implementation of the objectives/targets of the Qatar National Vision 2030, which plans the evolution, in practice, of the economic, social, cultural, human and environmental development of the State during the next few years (Cuba); 122.10 Continue to conduct outreach activities to raise public awareness of human rights (Afghanistan); 122.11 Continue to spread human rights awareness throughout the country (Pakistan); 122.12 Continue and further expand human rights awareness-raising programmes (Armenia);  122.13 Continue to train law enforcement officials and human rights teachers and to raise awareness of the need for tolerance and harmony among races and ethnic groups and for intercultural relations (State of Palestine); 122.14 Organize more human rights education activities for staff of public services, particularly law enforcement officers (Viet Nam); 122.15 Continue efforts to amend national laws and legislation in order to ensure that they are in conformity with the recommendations made by treaty bodies (Lebanon); 122.16 Continue and strengthen relations with OHCHR (Kuwait); 122.17 Continue efforts to promote and protect the rights of vulnerable groups, particularly women and children (Brunei Darussalam); 122.18 Continue endeavours to promote and protect the rights of children and women (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 122.19 Further strengthen the promotion of the rights of women and girls (Maldives); 122.20 Continue to promote gender equality and eliminate discrimination against women and girls in accordance with its obligations under the Convention for the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Singapore); 122.21 Improve legislation in order to better implement the provisions of the Convention for the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Russian Federation); 122.22 Continue making efforts to improve the normative framework for the protection of women in Qatar (Nicaragua); 122.23 Continue efforts to improve gender equality and strengthen women’s status in society (Turkey); 122.24 Follow up government action to empower women and combat female stereotypes (Lebanon); 122.25 Continue efforts towards female empowerment and achieve gender equality (Eritrea); 122.26 Denounce gender discrimination (Nigeria); 122.27 Continue measures aimed at improving the status of women in society and protect them from all forms of discrimination (Algeria); 122.28 Further promote gender equality so that women play a greater role in economic and social development (China); 122.29 Continue its efforts to enhance women’s role in society and their effective involvement in the development process, as well as enabling their participation in economic, political and business activities in the country (Romania); 122.30 Continue to take necessary measures to enable women to be equal partners in development and decision-making (India); 122.31 Continue efforts to improve the status of women in society and promote gender equality at all levels, thereby enhancing the contribution of women to the development process (Sri Lanka); 122.32 Continue its commendable efforts to empower women in social, political, economic and public life, including by continuing its positive campaigning to raise awareness of women’s rights (Malaysia); 122.33 Continue efforts to ensure the representation of women at all levels of the political process and their participation in public life (Chile); 122.34 Address the issue of the election of women to parliament (the Shura Council) (Ghana); 122.35 Take concrete steps to enhance women’s awareness of their rights and guarantee and increase women’s public and political participation (Czech Republic); 122.36 Strengthen measures to ensure gender equality, particularly in the transmission of nationality to the children of women married to non-citizens (Argentina); 122.37 Continue its efforts to end discrimination against women by taking all necessary measures to eliminate obstacles to their access to all fields of society, including the justice system (Sweden); 122.38 Facilitate women’s access to justice and mainstream a gender-based approach to justice and employment (Sierra Leone); 122.39 Continue improving women’s empowerment programmes and address issues of discrimination and domestic violence by intensifying awareness-raising campaigns and providing better access to remedies for all victims of domestic violence, including migrant workers irrespective of their legal status (Philippines); 122.40 Follow up efforts made to protect children from violence (Jordan); accountability of all perpetrators while ensuring victims are provided with adequate redress, reparations and access to full rehabilitation (Slovenia); 122.41  Take measures to combat intrafamily violence (Côte d’Ivoire);  122.42  Strengthen efforts to combat violence against women (Ecuador);  122.43  Strengthen efforts to prevent violence against women (Rwanda);  122.44  Strengthen efforts to prevent violence against women and ensure the accountability of all perpetrators while ensuring victims are provided with adequate redress, reparations and access to full rehabilitation (Slovenia);122.45 Set up an awareness campaign to prevent violence against women (Jordan); 122.46 Work to encourage both Qatari and expatriate women to report incidents of sexual violence, such as rape, to the authorities and increase the awareness of police, prosecutors and judges about the seriousness of the issue (Canada); 122.47 Continue with efforts to fight against human trafficking (Pakistan); 122.48 Continue to strengthen measures to combat human trafficking and child labour (Sri Lanka); 122.49 Continue to improve on efforts to combat human trafficking (Nigeria); 122.50 Continue to provide protection to victims of trafficking in human beings and to ensure systematic procedures for the identification of victims (Republic of Moldova); 122.51 Continue to make efforts to combat trafficking in persons, including through expanding and strengthening international, regional and bilateral cooperation (Uzbekistan); 122.52 Ensure the implementation of the existing anti-trafficking legislation (Albania); 122.53 Ensure the effective implementation of the National Strategy to Combat Trafficking in Persons (Côte d’Ivoire); 122.54 Continue to implement the National Strategy to Combat Trafficking in Persons (Turkey); 122.55 Continue to strengthen the family and family values (Malaysia); 122.56 Continue to protect the family as the basic social unit (Eritrea); 122.57 Continue to pursue the adoption and implementation of legislative or administrative measures aimed at the promotion and protection of the rights of the child (Chile); 122.58 Provide all the requirements needed to implement the national Family Cohesion and Empowerment of Women Strategy (State of Palestine); 122.59 Encourage freedom of expression of opinion and strengthen cooperation and coordination with civil society and non-governmental organizations (Norway); 122.60 Continue to improve the social security system so as to provide better safeguards for the elderly, persons with disabilities and migrants (China); 122.61 Take necessary measures and steps to improve legislation on the right to health and ensure access for all persons to health services without discrimination (Pakistan); 122.62 Strengthen its cooperation with civil society organizations for the promotion and protection of human rights in the area of health services (Angola); 122.63 Continue measures to improve the education system and ensure universal access to quality education (Uzbekistan); 122.64 Continue to strengthen the cooperation of the State with civil and social organizations working for the promotion and protection of human rights in the area of education (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 122.65 Continue to step up its efforts to integrate the human rights approach in the study plans and programmes of the national education system (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 122.66 Prioritize the education of the girl child (Nigeria); 122.67 Continue efforts to provide education for persons with disabilities people and integrate them into society (Oman); 122.68 Continue to undertake measures to support and protect the rights of persons with disabilities (Singapore); 122.69 Pay particular attention to children belonging to vulnerable groups, including children with disabilities and from minority communities (India); 122.70 Implement necessary measures to ensure adequate labour conditions and to combat human trafficking (Japan); 122.71 Continue the ongoing work on labour sector reform (Benin); 122.72 Strengthen measures to protect and promote the rights of foreign workers (Côte d’Ivoire); 122.73 Take further measures to protect the rights of migrant workers (Portugal); 122.74 Expand efforts to protect and promote the rights of migrant workers (Somalia); 122.75 Take the necessary measures to improve the situation of foreign workers (Algeria); 122.76 Take the necessary measures to eliminate the discrimination suffered by immigrants, particularly migrant workers (Argentina); 122.77 Step up efforts to provide protection to migrant workers, guaranteeing them full access to justice (Chile); 122.78 Continue to improve the working conditions of low-paid migrant labourers, especially those working as domestic help and on infrastructure projects (Canada); 122.79 Continue with actions aimed at the protection of migrant workers, especially domestic workers, from mistreatment and abuse (Ecuador); 122.80 Step up its efforts to strengthen compliance with the Labour Code (Act No. 14 of 2014) and take action to strengthen the effective protection of migrant workers (Spain); 122.81 Continue its efforts to provide development and humanitarian aid to least developed countries (Yemen); 122.82 Strengthen its international cooperation for the sustainable development of the countries of the South (Somalia); 122.83 Continue its humanitarian role and its role in development (Kuwait); 122.84 Continue to play an effective and positive role at the regional and international levels (Sudan). 123. The following recommendations enjoy the support of Qatar, which considers them to be already implemented or in the process of implementation: 123.1 Strengthen the independence of the National Human Rights Committee by limiting the role of government appointees (Ghana); 123.2 Strengthen the capacity of the National Human Rights Committee in the area of impartial monitoring, investigation, and reception of allegations of torture or ill-treatment (Mexico); 123.3 Significantly improve the implementation of protective measures contained in labour laws, in particular by increasing the number of labour inspectors (Belgium); 123.4 Make adequate labour conditions and decent work an important criterion for granting building contracts and permits and actively improve the enforcement of labour laws, including by applying penalties to and blacklisting contractors who violate the relevant laws and decrees (Netherlands); 123.5 Adopt the necessary measures to guarantee the access of migrant workers to justice in civil, criminal and labour courts, as well as to assistance and consular protection (Mexico); 123.6 Step up its efforts to protect the rights of migrant workers and fight against exploitation, ill-treatment and abuse by their employers (Slovenia); 123.7 Ensure that the hotline established to respond to migrant workers’ complaints provides appropriate interpretation, to the extent possible (Thailand); 123.8 Harmonize the work of charitable organizations with the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism (Syrian Arab Republic). 124. The following recommendations will be examined by Qatar, which will provide responses in due course, but no later than the twenty-seventh session of the Human Rights Council in September 2014: 124.1 Ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Rome Statute, the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (France); 124.2 Consider ratifying those international human rights instruments to which the State is not yet a party (Nicaragua); 124.3 Consider acceding to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Turkmenistan); 124.4 Consider acceding to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and adopt a new media law that respects freedom of expression (United States of America); 124.5 Consider ratifying the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocols thereto (Rwanda); 124.6 Consider ratifying the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, as recommended during the first cycle (Slovenia); 124.7 Consider early ratification of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Japan); 124.8 Ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Montenegro); 124.9 Ratify the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Tunisia); 124.10 Ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, as fundamental documents in the area of human rights (Russian Federation); 124.11 Accede to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural (Germany); 124.12 Accede to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Australia); 124.13 Ratify the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Optional Protocol thereto, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocols thereto (Portugal); 124.14 Ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, as well as the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Austria); 124.15 Ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (Maldives); 124.16 Consider ratifying the following international instruments: the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the second Optional Protocol thereto; the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture, implementing the national preventive mechanism (Uruguay); 124.17 Ratify the human rights treaties listed in section I A of the compilation of OHCHR, notably the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families, as well as the Optional Protocols to the Convention against Torture, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Ghana); 124.18 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (Costa Rica); 124.19 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture, as also recommended by the Qatari National Human Rights Committee (Denmark); 124.20 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Tunisia); 124.21  Consider ratifying the Migrant Workers Convention (Albania);  124.22  Consider ratifying the Migrant Workers Convention (Indonesia);  124.23  Consider ratifying the Migrant Workers Convention (Rwanda);  124.24  Ratify the Migrant Workers  Convention with a view  to better  harmonizing national legislation with international norms (Senegal); 124.25 Accede to core human rights instruments to which the State is not yet a party, including the Migrant Workers Convention (Philippines); 124.26 Implement measures to strengthen women’s capacities and empower them to participate in political and economic life, and ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Portugal); 124.27 Ratify the third Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Montenegro); 124.28 Ratify the core ILO conventions, including the Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189), and reform the law on sponsorship, removing the requirement for foreign nationals to obtain the permission of their current employer before changing jobs or leaving the country (Austria); 124.29 Ratify the three remaining core ILO conventions and enforce ratified conventions and the relevant labour laws effectively, with a special focus on the elimination of forced labour (ILO Convention No. 29), while continuing to work in close and active cooperation with ILO and other international organizations (Netherlands); 124.30 Ratify the ILO Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 (No. 169) and ILO Convention No. 189 (Sierra Leone); 124.31 Accede to ILO Convention No. 189 (Philippines); 124.32 Accede to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Armenia); 124.33 Equip the government committee established to consider accession to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights with adequate power and resources to accelerate the process and reach a practical outcome (Viet Nam); 124.34 Integrate the Rabat Plan of Action on the prohibition of advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence in the national legislation regulating the media and religious institutions, and ensure the actual implementation of the Plan (Syrian Arab Republic); 124.35 Continue to strengthen protective measures and legal rights for women, and give full citizenship rights to the children of Qatari mothers and non-Qatari fathers (Norway); 124.36 Consider granting Qatari nationality to the children of Qatari women married to foreign nationals (Greece); 124.37 Achieve real progress with regard to women’s rights by reforming the Nationality Act, to ensure gender equality and to give Qatari women the right to transmit their nationality to their children, and by withdrawing reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the Optional Protocol thereto (France); 124.38 Amend the legislation to eliminate discrimination against women with respect to the transmission of nationality to their children and the registration of civil acts (Mexico); 124.39 Amend Act No. 22 of 2006 on family and personal status matters to eliminate provisions that lead to discrimination against women, for example the failure of the law to criminalize marital rape (Spain); 124.40 Take the necessary measures to amend national laws that allow discrimination against women so that those laws are in line with international human rights standards, and criminalize domestic violence (Switzerland); 124.41 Take effective actions to ensure that women are fully protected from discrimination and violence, including by criminalizing domestic violence against women, adopt legal measures to guarantee full gender equality, and consider withdrawing reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Germany); 124.42 Adopt specific legislation to criminalize all forms of violence against women (Czech Republic); 124.43 Criminalize domestic violence and ensure that a broad definition of the crime is applied so as to ensure the protection of all persons concerned, including domestic workers (Belgium); 124.44 Continue to build the capacity of an independent judiciary that would process court cases more effectively and independently (Canada); 124.45 Strengthen the judicial framework, including due process, freedom of expression and freedom of association (Australia); 124.46 Guarantee the exercise of freedom of religion or reach an agreement authorizing the opening of places of worship for people who are neither Muslims nor Christians (France); 124.47 Respect the right to freedom of opinion and expression, as accepted during the previous UPR cycle, and refrain from imposing any undue restriction on this right, including with regard to the new draft media law (Germany); 124.48 Implement fully legal guarantees for freedom of expression as stipulated in the Constitution, thus allowing Qatari citizens to exercise their freedom of expression and opinion and enabling independent media in the country (Slovenia); 124.49 Guarantee freedom of expression by protecting journalists, bloggers and media professionals from arbitrary arrest and detention and from censorship, including by amending those provisions in the Criminal Code and the draft media law that are inconsistent with international standards of freedom of expression (France); 124.50 Decriminalize defamation as recommended by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (Ghana); 124.51 Refrain from adopting any laws providing for censorship or undue control over the content of the media (Czech Republic); 124.52 Amend those articles of the draft media law and the draft cybercrime law that are inconsistent with international standards of freedom of expression (Austria); 124.53 Take immediate measures to ensure that the national regulations pertaining to the Internet guarantee freedom of expression (Sweden); 124.54 Ensure that the judicial and law enforcement system is not abused to harass individuals for expressing their political or religious views, including on the Internet (Czech Republic); 124.55 Amend the relevant national legislation, including the Law on Associations and Institutions, to reduce restrictions on procedures for establishing associations (Ireland); 124.56 Revise Law No. 18 of 2004 in order to remove restricting conditions for acquiring permission for a public demonstration, and take other steps to guarantee the full enjoyment of the right to freedom of assembly and the right of association (Czech Republic); 124.57 Continue efforts to achieve full universal health coverage, including for non-nationals, as part of the National Health Strategy (Thailand); 124.58 Extend the benefits of its health insurance, currently limited to Qataris and citizens of Gulf Cooperation Council countries, to any citizen residing in its territory (Comoros); 124.59 Reform the Labour Code so that it ensures the protection of the labour rights of all workers, including domestic and construction workers, and put in place mechanisms to improve enforcement of the law (Denmark); 124.60 Revise the labour law to protect the rights of all workers without discrimination and ensure their effective access to justice, in cooperation with ILO (Belgium); 124.61 Adopt a new Labour Code or amend the existing Code soon, so as to improve the conditions and rights of migrant and foreign workers (Italy); 124.62 Take active steps to reform its labour laws in order to improve working conditions for foreign workers, to give female domestic workers the necessary legal protection and to address the recent ruling by ILO on forced labour and freedom of association and collective bargaining (Norway); 124.63 Continue efforts to ensure the safety, security and dignity of migrant workers and to protect their interests through taking the requisite institutional and legislative measures (Nepal); 124.64 Take measures to ensure the access of migrants and non-citizens, especially children, to justice, employment, education, housing and health services (Czech Republic); 124.65 Continue efforts to promote and protect the rights of migrants, particularly those of female domestic workers (Indonesia); 124.66 Adopt all necessary measures, including legislative measures, in order to apply a policy on migrants with a human rights perspective, in particular with regard to the detention of migrants, especially women and children (Uruguay); 124.67 Guarantee respect for the rights of migrant workers, in particular by strengthening the capacity of the labour inspectorate, reform the kafala system and ratify ILO Convention No. 189 (France); 124.68 Consider abolishing the kafala system for all migrant workers and eliminating the exit permit system (Costa Rica); 124.69 Review the kafala system in order to comply with international standards (Sweden); 124.70 Establish a timetable for reform of the system of sponsorship-based employment (Brazil); 124.71 Abolish or reform the restrictive law on sponsorship, which drives potential labour exploitation and human trafficking, strengthen enforcement of the labour law, continue to increase awareness of human rights of migrant workers, and expand legal protections (United States of America); 124.72 Reform the sponsorship system, removing the requirement for foreign workers to obtain permission before leaving Qatar or moving jobs (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 124.73  Abolish the exit visa system for foreign workers (Brazil);  124.74  Abolish the exit visa system for migrant workers (Ireland);  124.75  Remove the requirement in the law  on sponsorship for foreign  nationals to obtain the permission of their current employer before moving jobs or leaving the country, and ensure that the rights of migrant workers are protected (Australia); 124.76 Improve the legal protection of migrant workers, apply the provisions of the labour laws that prohibit the retention of passports of migrant workers, strengthen institutional controls for the protection of migrant workers, and remove or amend the requirement for foreign nationals to obtain their sponsor’s consent in order to obtain exit visas (Switzerland); 124.77 Take further urgent steps to address the concerns raised during the session about the recruitment and treatment of foreign workers (Ghana); 124.78 Abolish the laws on sponsorship and include domestic workers in laws that protect workers (Spain); 124.79 Ensure that the draft law on domestic workers, which it is hoped will be adopted very soon, is in line with ILO Convention No. 189 (Uruguay); 124.80 Develop a specific strategy to ensure that domestic workers can file complaints in cases of violence and abuse, without fear of reprisal or harassment (Belgium); 124.81 Reform labour laws to ensure that domestic workers are legally protected and improve the enforcement of those laws, in order to ensure that the rights of foreign workers in Qatar are guaranteed (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 124.82 Adopt legal provisions that guarantee migrant workers the right to join trade unions (Spain); 124.83 Hold regular meetings of agreed institutional mechanisms to address issues pertaining to migrant workers and ensure dialogue under such arrangements (India); 124.84 Maintain its commitment to dedicating 0.7 per cent of gross national income to overseas development assistance in order to support economic and social rights in poor countries (Sierra Leone). 125. The following recommendations did not enjoy the support of Qatar: 125.1 Examine the possibility of introducing a formal moratorium on the death penalty (Switzerland); 125.2 Establish a formal moratorium on the use of the death penalty with a view to ratifying the second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Australia); 125.3 Consider the possibility of adopting a de jure moratorium on executions, with a view to abolishing the death penalty (Italy); 125.4 Commute all death sentences, declare a moratorium on executions and move towards abolition of the death penalty (Norway); 125.5 Abolish the death penalty (Portugal); 125.6 Initiate a public debate with a view to abolishing the death penalty de jure, after more than 10 years of de facto moratorium on executions (France); 125.7 Release all prisoners of conscience, including the poet Mohammed Al-`Ajami, and respect the rights of all individuals to freedom of expression (United States of America). 126. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as having been endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex 
[English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of Qatar was headed by Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdulrahman bin Jassim Al-Thani, Assistant Minister for Foreign Affairs for International Cooperation and was composed of the following members: • H.E. Mr. Faisal Abdulla Al-Henzab, Permanent Representative of the State of Qatar to the United Nations Office in Geneva; • H.E. Sheikh Khaled bin Jassim Al-Thani, Director of Human Rights Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • H.E. Mr. Mohammed Khalid Al-Maadeed, Member of the Advisory Council, the Advisory Council; • Dr. Mohammed Ebrahim Shahbeck, Legal Expert, the Advisory Council; • Colonel. 	Abdulla Al-Muhannadi, Director of Human Rights Bureau, Ministry of Interior; • Ms. Maryam	 Yousuf ARAB, Assistant to the Director of Juridical Studies Department, Ministry of Justice; • Sheikha Hind Al-Thani, Legal specialist, Department of Management conventions and international cooperation, Ministry of Justice; • Mr. Saleh Saeed Al-Marri, Director of the 	Labour Relations Dept. Ministry of Labour & Social Affairs; • Mr. Mohamed Ali Al-Meer, Assistant to the Director of Inspection Department, Ministry of Labour & Social Affairs; • Mr. Saleh Ali Al-Khaldi, First specialist, Ministry of Labour & Social Affairs; • Dr. Hamda Hassan Al-Sulaiti, Councillor, Supreme Education Council; • Ms. Mona Sabah S. Al-Kuwari, Expert analysis, Office	 of policy analysis, The Supreme Education Council; • Ms. Wafaa Anbar Al-Nuaimi, First Legal specialist, Supreme council of Health; • Mr. 	Mohammed Ahmed Al-Saadi, Director of International Cooperation Department, Ministry of Culture, Arts and Heritage; • Mr. Youssuf Al-Mulla, Executive Director of the Social Rehabilitation Center; • Ms. Mariam Al-Maliki, Councilor, the Social Rehabilitation Center; • Ms. Fareeda Al-Obaidly, the Social Rehabilitation Center; • Ms. Noor Al-Hur, Legal Expert, the Social Rehabilitation Center; • Ms. Manal Yousuf Al-Mahmoud, Councilor, Supreme Council of Family Affaires; • Ms. Hanadi Nedham Al-Shafai, Political Researcher, Human Rights Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Aisha Saleh Al-Sulaiti, Third International affairs researcher, Human Rights Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Alanoud Kassim	 Mohammad Al-Tamimi, Third Secretary, Human Rights Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Almuhannad Ali Al-Hammadi, Second Secretary, Permanent Mission of Qatar in Geneva; • Ms. Noor Al-Sada, Second Secretary, Permanent Mission of Qatar in Geneva; • Mr. Jassim Al-Maawda, Third Secretary, Permanent Mission of Qatar in Geneva; • Mr. Saad bin Ali Al-Kharji, Office of the Minister’s Assistant for International Cooperation Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Mishaal Saeed Al-Mazroey, Office of the Minister’s Assistant for International Cooperation Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Mounira Mohamed Al-Rumaihi, Third International affairs researcher, Office of the Minister’s Assistant for International Cooperation Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Ali Abdulrazzaq Marafi, Assistant of the Director of International Cooperation Department, Ministry of Culture, Arts and Heritage; • Ms. Noora Mohammed	 Al-Marzouqi, International Organization Desk Officer, Ministry of Culture, Arts and Heritage; • Dr. Mohamed Saeed Mohamed Eltayeb, Legal Expert, Human Rights Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 