Distr.: General 26 March 2014 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-sixth session Agenda item 6 Universal periodic review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Slovakia * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.14-12706 *1412706* 
Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–109 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–17 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 18–109 5 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 110–111 15  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 25 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its eighteenth session from 27 January to 7 February 2014. The review of Slovakia was held at the 11th meeting on 3 February 2014. The delegation of Slovakia was headed by Peter Javor.ík, State Secretary, Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs. At its 17th meeting held on 6 February 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on Slovakia. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Slovakia: Ethiopia, Mexico and Saudi Arabia. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Slovakia: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/SVK/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/SVK/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/SVK/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, the Czech Republic, Germany, Liechtenstein, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden, Spain and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Slovakia through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. In its introductory remarks, the delegation of Slovakia expressed the view that the outcome of the universal periodic review provided national authorities with important guidance on how to enhance the protection of human rights, which was one of the main strengths of the review process. 6. The delegation made a brief presentation of its national report, with a focus on how the recommendations from the first cycle of the universal periodic review had been addressed and on the main developments that had taken place in the last four years. As a follow-up to the first cycle, all recommendations had been subject to thorough consideration by the relevant national authorities. A number of legislative and practical measures had been adopted to implement those recommendations during the reporting period. 7. While acknowledging the remaining challenges in some areas, the delegation expressed the commitment of the Government of Slovakia to continuing its efforts to achieve further progress in the institutional and legal framework related to human rights. Furthermore, the delegation reiterated the commitment of the Government to continuing the dialogue with civil society, including by involving its representatives in discussions on policies and programmes relating to human rights. 8. The delegation reported that civil society was involved in the preparation process of the national report through the Government Council for Human Rights, National Minorities and Gender Equality. The draft national report was presented to members of the Council and was discussed by the Council at one of its sessions. In addition, civil society representatives and the public were given an opportunity to provide their comments on the consolidated version of the national report during the consultation process. 9. The delegation also presented the main developments that had taken place since the first cycle of the universal periodic review. Some positive changes had been made in the institutional framework related to human rights. For example, the Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs had undertaken more responsibility in respect of human rights policies by taking on the role of coordinator of human rights policies and by chairing the Government Council for Human Rights, National Minorities and Gender Equality, which is a forum for regular discussions between Government representatives, civil society and human rights experts. The Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs in its new coordinating role had served to ensure the effective division of tasks and responsibilities among the line ministries in the field of human rights and an efficient follow-up to the issues discussed. 10. During the reporting period, important legislative amendments to the Anti.discrimination Act were adopted, with a view to further strengthening protection against discrimination, including widening the scope of the definition of indirect discrimination. By establishing the Committee for the Rights of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex Persons in October 2012, the Government responded to the need to ensure better awareness of discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity. 11. As a multi-ethnic country Slovakia had made efforts to create a suitable environment for the preservation and protection of national minorities. In this respect, the Government had been actively engaged in a dialogue with international human rights monitoring bodies, in particular those of the Council of Europe, and had benefited from the invaluable expertise of those bodies when adopting and implementing national policies regarding the rights of national minorities. The dialogue with the High Commissioner on National Minorities of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and with the Council of Europe Venice Commission on particular thematic issues served as a positive example in this regard. The Government Plenipotentiary for National Minorities had been established in 2012 to, inter alia, ensure adequate follow-up to recommendations made by regional human rights mechanisms on national minorities. 12. Having in mind the absence of a comprehensive concept paper on human rights, the Government had initiated the drafting of a national strategy for the promotion and protection of human rights. In the preparatory stage, a broad discussion on further improvements in the situation of human rights had been initiated, involving various governmental and non-governmental actors. The Government was planning to complete the drafting of the strategy by June 2014. 13. During the reporting period Slovakia had ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) and its Optional Protocol and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (OP-ICESCR). As regards the question of ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CPED), the delegation stated that all necessary legislative amendments had been adopted and the national ratification procedure was under way. Slovakia had also ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure in December 2013. 14. The delegation stated that Slovakia had started the process of ratification of the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse. The relevant legal process had been initiated for the ratification of the Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, which remained a priority, and the Government expected to complete the ratification of the amendments in 2014. 15. The delegation stated that the situation on the rights of the Roma required further efforts to achieve satisfactory results from a human rights, social and economic perspective. In general, improving the situation of the Roma minority had been a long-term priority for the Government. The Strategy for Roma Integration up to 2020, which was adopted in 2012, represented the primary comprehensive policy paper for the social integration of the Roma and provided a basis for adopting the policies in four main areas of integration: health, employment, housing and education. 16. As noted by the delegation, the Government acknowledged the need for a comprehensive approach to the process of integration of the Roma. Despite slow progress in this field, there had been several positive examples, in particular with regard to housing, health and employment. 17. The delegation stated that a number of challenging tasks remained to be completed. The establishment of a national human rights institution in line with the Paris Principles had been among the most pressing objectives. Necessary legislative steps were expected to be taken in the near future. Finally, a procedure to establish a national independent institution for the rights of the child was under way and the first legislative draft was expected in the first half of 2014. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 18. During the interactive dialogue, 67 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 19. The Russian Federation noted the adoption of programmes to safeguard the rights of minorities and the enactment of legislation concerning non-discrimination. However, problems relating to the Roma community tended to be addressed, inter alia, through evictions and denial of their rights. The Russian Federation made a recommendation. 20. Serbia commended the accession to CRPD and its optional protocol and to OP.ICESCR. It supported the reforms to the human rights infrastructure and commended the policies on social inclusion of the Roma focusing on education, employment, health and housing. It asked about the experience of Slovakia in overcoming the challenges to a more efficient implementation of anti-discrimination laws. 21. Slovenia welcomed the intention of Slovakia to provide more police specialists to work with Roma communities, but was concerned that calls by the Ombudswoman to investigate violations of the rights of the Roma after the incident of June 2013 in Moldava and Bodvou and to convene a dedicated parliamentary session had been rejected. Slovenia made recommendations. 22. Spain took note of the action taken to combat discrimination and integrate the Roma community. It recognized that important steps had been taken to promote tolerance, intercultural dialogue and respect for diversity. Spain made recommendations.  23. Sri Lanka welcomed the inclusion of human rights in the school curricula, but was concerned about discrimination against Roma children and their disproportionate numbers in special and segregated education. It noted the efforts made to combat human trafficking in cooperation with the International Organization for Migration and other stakeholders. It made recommendations. 24. Sweden looked forward to receiving responses to its advance questions concerning the Roma population, specifically about the steps being taken to ensure equal education opportunities for Roma children and about land and property issues in relation to Roma settlements. Sweden made recommendations. 25. Thailand commended the progress made in integrating education on human rights into the national school curricula. Despite actions to integrate people belonging to ethnic minorities better, it noted that the Roma minority continued to face discrimination and stigmatization. It applauded Slovakia for the steps taken to promote gender equality, but was concerned about domestic and gender-based violence. Thailand made recommendations. 26. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia noted the strengthened legal framework through accession to international conventions and the adoption and implementation of domestic law, in particular in the areas of anti-discrimination and human rights legislation. It enquired about the functioning of the Committee for the Prevention and Elimination of Racism, Xenophobia, Anti-Semitism and Other Forms of Intolerance. It made a recommendation. 27. Tunisia noted the broadening of the mandate of the Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs to include human rights, the establishment of the Plenipotentiary for National Minorities, the adoption of the Strategy for Roma Integration and the signing and ratification of human rights instruments, including CRPD and its optional protocol. Tunisia made recommendations. 28. Turkmenistan welcomed the measures taken to improve the human rights institutional framework of Slovakia during the period under review. Turkmenistan made recommendations. 29. The United States of America welcomed the adoption of the Strategy for Roma Integration. It was concerned about extremism, violence and discrimination against the Roma and a continued lack of judicial accountability, including the abuse of power by judges and the low level of public trust in judicial fairness and integrity. It made recommendations. 30. Uzbekistan welcomed ratification of CRPD, OP-CRPD, OP-ICESCR and the Optional Protocol to CRC. It commended the Strategy for Roma Integration, the concept of combating extremism and the establishment of the Committee for the Prevention and Elimination of Racism, Xenophobia, Anti-Semitism and Other Forms of Intolerance. However, the treaty bodies highlighted persistent discrimination and racism against the Roma, ethnic minorities and migrants. Uzbekistan made recommendations. 31. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterated the concern expressed by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) regarding the persistent stigmatization and discrimination of the Roma community and other ethnic minorities. It was also concerned about the appointment of judges by the national executive and the failure to provide legal aid from the moment a person is deprived of his or her liberty. It made recommendations. 32. Viet Nam commended Slovakia on its human rights achievements, including accession to international instruments, the harmonization of national laws with European Union legislation, the implementation of anti-discrimination recommendations, the elimination of racism and combating human trafficking. It made recommendations. 33. Albania noted the strengthening of human rights bodies within public institutions, the drafting of strategies and amendments to existing legislation, particularly in the key area of anti-discrimination. It commended the ratification of CRPD and its Optional Protocol and the Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence. It remained concerned that Roma people still face discrimination, suffer social stigmatization and exclusion and at the high drop-out rate from school of Roma children. Albania made a recommendation. 34. Algeria welcomed the ratification of CRPD, the establishment of the Plenipotentiary for National Minorities and the adoption of the Strategy for Roma Integration. It encouraged adoption of the strategy that was under consideration to promote and protect human rights. It was concerned about growing racial discrimination and about leaders known to be anti-Roma acceding to key local authority positions. Algeria made recommendations.  35. Angola noted the ratification of international human rights instruments since the last review and commended the establishment of  the Committee for the Prevention and Elimination of Racism, Xenophobia, Anti-Semitism and Other Forms of Intolerance, amendments to anti-discrimination legislation and the provision of compensation for victims of violence. Angola made a recommendation. 36. Argentina welcomed ratification of CRPD, OP-CRPD and OP-ICESCR. It commended the amendment of the Criminal Code and the Anti-discrimination Act as essential steps to combat and prevent racial discrimination. Argentina made recommendations. 37. Australia welcomed progress on ensuring the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons. It acknowledged the adoption of the Strategy for Roma Integration, but remained concerned about the exclusion of and violence against the Roma. It noted media concerns over judicial corruption and commended the establishment of a judicial reform task force. Australia made recommendations. 38. Austria commended Slovakia for the numerous efforts undertaken since the last review. It was, however, concerned about the pace of implementation of the Strategy for Roma Integration. Austria made recommendations. 39. The delegation stated that the improvement in the situation of the Roma remained among the priorities of the Government. In 2012, the Strategy for Roma Integration up to 2020 was approved to address the challenges of social inclusion of Roma communities. The Revised National Action Plan of the Decade of Roma Inclusion 2005–2015 (updated for 2011–2015) was considered as the action plan of the Strategy in four priority areas: education, employment, health and housing. The Strategy had envisaged cooperation with civil society, including cooperation with non-governmental organizations (NGOs) working on the rights of the Roma. The Office of the Government Plenipotentiary for Roma Communities was assigned to supervise the implementation of specific policies, programmes and projects of the Strategy. 40. Segregation based on ethnicity and discrimination was explicitly prohibited by the Anti-discrimination Act and by the School Act. The domestic legal framework provided full guarantees for the equal treatment of all children in education regardless of their ethnic or other origin. A number of systematic measures had been adopted to promote education, including free preschool education, specialized classes with compensatory and development programmes, financial assistance and subsidies for children of parents in material need. The Ministry of Education had adopted two internal regulations that clearly instructed schools and school facilities to refrain from any form of discrimination, exclusion or segregation of children. 41. The delegation responded to a question regarding the court judgment concerning the segregation of Roma children in a school in eastern Slovakia. As a follow-up to the ruling of the court, concrete measures aimed, inter alia, at promoting the integration of children, in particular in school canteens and school yards, had been adopted. 42. As regards the construction of so-called “anti-Roma” walls, the delegation indicated that Slovakia denounced and prohibited segregation and “ghettoization” of any kind. Municipalities and local authorities were systematically requested by the relevant national bodies to prevent the construction of walls that would separate parts of municipalities where the Roma lived from those where the majority population lived. Municipalities had been strongly encouraged to work actively with Roma communities. 43. The delegation stated that housing was a major issue, as there were more households than housing units in Slovakia. With a 97 per cent rate of home ownership, it had been difficult for State bodies to intervene directly in the housing market to ensure that low-income families had access to housing. The Government had adopted measures to create the necessary conditions to ensure availability of housing for vulnerable groups, including the Roma. Due to the State programme for housing, subsidies for social rental housing had been allocated to municipalities to make housing rents affordable for low-income families, including Roma communities. 44. Land ownership for the Roma remained a problem. In the countryside, property had been fragmented into small sections of private property and groups of Roma might be settled on land belonging to various owners. The delegation reported on the draft building code, which envisaged a plan for ensuring land ownership for the Roma. 45. The new legislation on the provision of social benefits concerned only the provision of assistance in material form. A person might be entitled to this benefit on condition that he or she carried out some community services or work amounting to 32 hours a month. The projects entitled “Field social work in municipalities” and “Community centres” were among other activities aimed at reducing the level of poverty. A project on increasing employment and the employability of disadvantaged jobseekers with the objective of providing employment services to jobseekers from socially excluded communities was in progress. 46. In 2013, the Government approved the National Action Plan for the Prevention and Elimination of Violence against Women for 2014–2019, which included solutions for institutional support for victims of violence against women and domestic violence. Additionally, in January 2014, the Government approved the National Strategy for the Protection of Children against Violence which aimed, inter alia, to establish a national coordination framework for addressing violence against children. 47. Azerbaijan commended the signing and ratification of CRPD and its Optional Protocol. It noted concerns expressed by the treaty bodies about gender inequalities, the continued stigmatization of and discrimination against the Roma and the prevalent stereotyping and widespread exclusion of the Roma from education, housing, health and political participation. Azerbaijan made recommendations. 48. Bangladesh shared the concerns of the treaty bodies about gender inequalities and prejudice, discrimination, stigmatization and negative attitudes towards Roma people, as well as prevalent stereotyping and the exclusion of minority groups from education, housing, health care and political participation. It deplored racist statements in political discourse and media-based hate speech. Bangladesh made recommendations. 49. Belarus expressed concern about racism in the media, the cruel treatment of patients in psychiatric hospitals, torture in police custody, the segregation of Roma in the education system and in access to housing, the cross-border trafficking of women and the internal trafficking of Roma women and children. Belarus made recommendations. 50. Belgium congratulated Slovakia on signing and ratifying CRPD and its Optional Protocol, and OP-ICESCR. It considered that more could be achieved in combating discrimination and promoting women’s rights. Belgium made recommendations. 51. Bosnia and Herzegovina praised the steps taken to promote and improve the performance of the human rights institutional framework and the signing and ratification of several international human rights instruments. It requested more details of the strategy to promote and protect human rights which was under preparation. It asked whether projects on inclusive education and improving the access of Roma children to education had brought better results. 52. Brazil encouraged Slovakia to fulfil its obligations under the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (OP-CRC-SC). It asked whether the Strategy for Roma Integration foresaw mechanisms to encourage the enrolment of Roma children in regular schools and what measures had been adopted to promote gender equality in the work force. Brazil made a recommendation. 53. Bulgaria welcomed the information on the Strategy for Roma Integration and the continued activities of the Government Plenipotentiary for Roma Communities. It noted the amendments to the Asylum Act and the Act on Residence of Foreigners, which provided protection to asylum seekers and foreigners. Bulgaria made a recommendation. 54. Cambodia commended the initiatives to combat violence against women and discrimination and promote social inclusion. In particular, it noted the Revised National Action Plan of the Decade of Roma Inclusion, the adoption of the Strategy for Roma Integration and the Plenipotentiary for National Minorities. Cambodia made a recommendation. 55. Canada asked whether the Government was considering a damage cap for civil defamation cases and, if not, what other strategies were being considered to prevent their effect on media self-censorship and freedom of expression. It stated that the human rights violations noted in the extraordinary report of the Ombudswoman warranted further review. Canada made recommendations. 56. Chile commended the Strategy for Roma Integration and the revision of the National Action Plan of the Decade of Roma Inclusion suggested by CERD, the ratification of CRPD and OP-CRPD and the steps taken to ratify OP-CAT. It noted that the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR) had expressed concern about the lack of access to safe water for all sectors of the population. Chile made recommendations. 57. China commended the achievements in enhancing gender equality, protecting women’s and children’s rights and promoting human rights education. It urged Slovakia to take more effective measures to protect the rights of minority groups, including the rights of Roma people to health and education. China made recommendations. 58. Côte d’Ivoire welcomed the administrative and institutional reforms planned to ensure the rule of law, including strengthening the legislation protecting minorities, combating discrimination and criminalizing racial discrimination and extremism, the provisions on rights of asylum, the actions to integrate the Roma people and protect victims of domestic violence and the human rights training for the security forces. It made recommendations. 59. Cuba welcomed the efforts made for implementation of recommendations since the last review and the results therefrom, in particular the adoption of the Anti-discrimination Act. It regretted the persistence of discriminatory practices, the segregation of Roma children in schools and racist and xenophobic conduct exacerbated by the economic crisis. Cuba made recommendations. 60. Cyprus welcomed the signing and ratification of international human rights instruments, including CRPD and its Optional Protocol, and the steps taken to mainstream human rights, including those of the Roma. It requested information on measures taken thus far to combat human trafficking and on the specific assistance provided to victims. Cyprus made a recommendation. 61. The Czech Republic commended the efforts of Slovakia to improve the access of socially disadvantaged children to education. It noted that it had not yet ratified OP-CAT. It made recommendations. 62. Denmark noted that Slovakia had not ratified OP-CAT, which it considers a key instrument in preventing torture. It welcomed the efforts on Roma integration, including by the Office of the Government Plenipotentiary for Roma Communities, but was concerned about reported discrimination, intolerance, stigmatization and prejudice against them. Denmark made recommendations. 63. Ecuador commended ratification of CRPD, OP-CRPD and OP-ICESCR and the establishment of the Committee for the Prevention and Elimination of Racism, Xenophobia, Anti-Semitism and Other Forms of Intolerance. It encouraged the continued efforts to promote and protect children’s rights and, in particular, to build an inclusive education system. Ecuador made recommendations. 64. Egypt commended the accession to CRPD, improvements to alternative child care and human rights education and training activities. It noted challenges, such as combating violence against women, establishing wage equality and eradicating human trafficking. It was concerned about the continued discrimination against minorities. An independent national human rights institution should be established. Egypt made recommendations. 65. Estonia encouraged the continued steps to implement policy programmes for Roma integration, to adopt the National Strategy for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, intensify efforts to combat gender-based violence, promote the participation of women in the public and private sectors and diminish the gender wage gap. It hoped for swift ratification of the Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute. Estonia made recommendations.  66. Finland commended the adoption of the Strategy for Roma Integration. It asked how Slovakia would ensure that a policy of desegregation of Roma children in schools was effectively implemented in practice. It further asked how Slovakia would ensure the active participation of Roma representatives in implementing and assessing the results of the strategy. Finland made recommendations. 67. France encouraged Slovakia to ratify OP-CAT and CPED, adopt its planned strategy to promote and protect human rights and update its action plan to combat extremism. It asked whether a deadline had been set for implementing the measures envisaged to combat discrimination. France made recommendations. 68. Germany was concerned about the situation of minorities, especially the Roma and the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex communities. It asked about the measures taken by Slovakia concerning the separating walls built by local populations, the high school drop-out rate among Roma children and their segregation in schools. It also asked for information on efforts to increase acceptance of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons and to combat discrimination and on the progress made in reducing the unequal treatment of women and better protecting them from domestic violence. 69. Guatemala welcomed the appointment of a Plenipotentiary for National Minorities, and the adoption of the concept for combating extremism, the Strategy for Roma Integration and the Decade for Roma Inclusion. It shared the concern of CERD about the alleged increased in hate speech in the media and on the Internet and urged further action to promote tolerance. Guatemala made a recommendation. 70. The Holy See commended the progress made in protecting persons with disabilities, children, migrants and trafficked persons, the fight against racism and xenophobia through new legislation and the ratification of international treaties. It stated that while the situation of the Roma, migrants, refugees and asylum seekers had improved, some challenges remained. The Holy See made recommendations. 71. Hungary requested an update on the challenges facing the Plenipotentiary for National Minorities. Expressing concern about the restrictive provisions of the Language Law, it urged Slovakia to adopt more comprehensive legislation on minority languages. It welcomed the ratification of CRPD, OP-CRPD and OP-ICESCR. Hungary made recommendations. 72. India welcomed the establishment of the Plenipotentiary for National Minorities. It noted that several treaty bodies had expressed concern about the limited mandate, independence and resources of the Slovak National Centre for Human Rights and continued stigmatization and discrimination against the Roma in education, housing, health and political participation. India made recommendations. 73. The delegation stated that access to family planning services had been provided to all; men and women enjoyed equal rights in family planning and had been provided with access to the necessary information in order to exercise this right. Contraceptives and other methods of family planning were widely available throughout the country and the cost could be covered by public and private health insurance based on medical justification, which enabled an individual assessment of the health risks to be taken into account, as well as ensuring effective use of public health-care funds. 74. In response to a question concerning lengthy court proceedings, the delegation referred to the resolution of 2012 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe related to judgements against Slovakia on violations of article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights. The Committee of Minsters had emphasized that Slovakia had taken sufficient measures, including legal amendments in the period from 2007 to 2010, leading to a decrease in the length of civil proceedings since 2004.  75. The delegation stated that several measures had been taken jointly by the Constitutional Court, the Ministry of Justice, the Supreme Court and the Bar Association to ensure the effective enforcement of orders by the Constitutional Court to other courts to expedite proceedings with significant delays. For example, the Constitutional Court had been maintaining a register of cases which had excessive lengthy proceedings. The Ministry of Justice and the courts had taken the responsibility of monitoring those cases. Disciplinary penalties could be imposed on judges and lawyers in such cases. Additionally, the drafting of a new civil procedure code had been initiated, with the objective of introducing new mechanisms to accelerate civil proceedings. 76. The delegation provided information on the measures taken to address issues of transparency and corruption in the judiciary, including improvements in legal aid services and changes to the Law on Judges. The publication on the website of the Ministry of Justice of all decisions of the courts had become mandatory. 77. In response to a query on delays in the ratification of the Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence, the delegation reported that Slovakia, as one of the first signatories of the Convention, had started the process of necessary legal amendments to enable the ratification of the Convention. The parliament had adopted a number of amendments to relevant laws that had been drafted based on the recommendations of international human rights mechanisms, including the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). Slovakia had adopted the National Action Plan for the Prevention and Elimination of Violence against Women. A draft document on the proposal for ratification of the Convention had been submitted for broad consultation in September 2013. Bearing in mind that comments had been received from more than 100 NGOs, the Government had decided to continue discussion of the document. 78. The delegation stated that the Constitution prohibited discrimination on any grounds and that the Anti-discrimination Act provided further protection from discrimination on the ground of sexual orientation. In 2012, the Committee for the Rights of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex Persons had been established with a mandate to contribute to further promotion of the rights of such persons. It was chaired by the Ministry of Justice and consisted of 24 members representing State bodies and NGOs. The Committee had been actively involved in human rights policymaking. 79. In relation to the ratification of CPED, the delegation stated that the national ratification process had already started and that the necessary amendments to legislation had been adopted to enable its ratification. The possibility of the ratification of OP-CAT had been subject to examination, with no final decision as yet. 80. Indonesia commended the implementation of the Strategy for Roma Integration, the amendment of the Anti-discrimination Act and the establishment of an emergency transit centre for refugees. Indonesia made recommendations. 81. The Islamic Republic of Iran stated that the report compiled by OHCHR raised concerns about the increase in violence against the Roma community, including verbal and physical attacks, and about the ill-treatment of detainees by police officers. It made recommendations. 82. Ireland welcomed the amendment of the Anti-discrimination Act. It expressed concern about policies and practices resulting in lower-quality education for Roma children owing to segregation. It regretted the rejection of previous recommendations concerning measures in that regard. It noted with regret that the Slovak National Centre for Human Rights had failed to meet the standards of the Paris Principles. Ireland made recommendations.  83. Israel commended the establishment of the Plenipotentiary on National Minorities and the efforts to protect the rights of the Roma community by promoting integration in the areas of housing, health and employment. Israel made a recommendation. 84. Libya commended the schemes for the promotion and protection of human rights that were being implemented by the Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs. It welcomed the amendment of the Anti-discrimination Act and the preparation of a national strategy to promote and protect human rights. Libya made a recommendation. 85. Malaysia noted the progress made in protecting the rights of minority and vulnerable groups, promoting gender equality and promoting and protecting the rights of women and children. However, it noted the persistence of negative attitudes to persons belonging to ethnic minorities. Malaysia made recommendations.  86. Mexico commended the Revised National Action Plan for the Decade of Roma Inclusion and the adoption of the Strategy for Roma Integration and urged steps to ensure their effective implementation. It welcomed the establishment of the Committee for the Prevention and Elimination of Racism, Xenophobia, Anti-Semitism and Other Forms of Intolerance and noted the undertaking to achieve gender equality in employment. Mexico made recommendations. 87. Montenegro welcomed steps to adopt a national strategy to promote and protect human rights and the continuous dialogue with civil society through the Government Council for Human Rights, National Minorities and Gender Equality. It recognized the determination of Slovakia to continue its coordinated efforts to implement the recommendations of monitoring bodies and to protect minorities by strengthening the institutional framework. Montenegro made recommendations. 88. Morocco welcomed the commitment to remedy the loss of accreditation of the Slovak National Centre for Human Rights. It commended the establishment of the Plenipotentiary for National Minorities and its work on behalf of the Roma community, the amendment of the Anti-discrimination Act and the Strategy for Roma Integration. It enquired about proposed future action in the area of human rights education. Morocco made a recommendation. 89. The Netherlands welcomed the efforts made by Slovakia in improving the implementation of international obligations in the area of human rights and the rule of law, as demonstrated by the provisions of the Criminal Code concerning racially-motivated crimes, including incitement to racial hatred. It was concerned about the status of women’s rights, particularly with regard to sexual and reproductive health and rights, and about the high incidence of violence against women. It made recommendations. 90. Nicaragua commended the promotion of institutional reforms to follow up on the recommendations of the universal periodic review and the development of national programmes to address problems such as gender inequality, discrimination against minorities and domestic violence. Nicaragua made recommendations.  91. Nigeria encouraged Slovakia to ratify additional international human rights treaties and urged it to fulfil its obligations under the Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence. It also urged Slovakia to address the problems affecting the status of citizenship of the Roma community without delay. 92. While noting that Slovakia had introduced important measures to reduce discrimination, Norway noted that the enrolment of Roma students in special schools or classes remained disproportionate. It welcomed the efforts announced to propose reforms of the judiciary. It noted that lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons continued to face discrimination, despite the amendment to the Criminal Code concerning sexual orientation. Norway made recommendations.  93. Oman noted that the rights stipulated by the School Act were guaranteed equally to all, in accordance with the principle of equal treatment in education enshrined in the Anti.discrimination Act. It commended the efforts to promote educational and training programmes and services for people with disabilities. Oman made a recommendation. 94. Pakistan commended the ratification of international human rights treaties and the adoption of legislative measures to fulfil human rights obligations. It welcomed the efforts made to prepare a national strategy for the promotion and protection of human rights. Pakistan made recommendations.  95. The Philippines noted the steps taken to combat discrimination, racism and racially-motivated crimes, particularly incitement to discrimination and racial violence against migrants. It commended the actions to protect women and children from violence and abuse, especially the law that allows for victims of violent crimes, including rape, sexual violence and abuse, to be compensated. It made recommendations. 96. Portugal welcomed the establishment of the Plenipotentiary for National Minorities and commended the efforts to combat discrimination, racism and xenophobia. It welcomed the introduction into legislation of the prohibition of corporal punishment of children. It commended the ratification of CRPD, OP-CRPD and OP-ICESCR. Portugal made recommendations. 97. The Republic of Moldova enquired about the results of the 2009–2013 National Strategy for Gender Equality, particularly regarding the participation of women in decision-making positions. While welcoming the implementation of programmes on human trafficking, it noted that the identification of victims of trafficking could be improved. It made recommendations.  98. The United Kingdom urged support for the Government Plenipotentiary for Roma Communities and the policies to address the marginalization, high unemployment and low living standards of the Roma. It also urged further action against cross-border trafficking and encouraged the promotion of a national programme to combat trafficking and development of a future strategy. It made recommendations.  99. Romania noted the progress in combating discrimination and promoting affirmative action. It requested additional examples of affirmative measures in favour of members of vulnerable groups. Romania made recommendations. 100. Uruguay commended the adoption of the National Action Plan for Gender Equality and the recent ratification of CRPD and OP-ICESCR. It noted a lack of awareness among the general public, especially in remote areas, of government policies to combat discrimination. Uruguay made recommendations. 101. The delegation stated that, despite the resignation of the Plenipotentiary for National Minorities and the Plenipotentiary for the Development of Civil Society in 2013, both bodies remained fully functional. The Government was in the process of identifying suitable candidates for the Plenipotentiary for National Minorities in close consultation with the representatives of national minorities. 102. Human rights training had been an important part of the measures undertaken to ensure that the police functioned in line with human rights standards. However, cases of excessive use of force by police had been still reported. The internal inspection structure within the Ministry of Interior had been in place to investigate such allegations, in addition to the investigations carried out by the Prosecutor’s Office. 103. Regarding the questions on combating extremism, the delegation stated that several steps had been taken. The necessary legislative amendments had been adopted with a view to enhancing the fight against extremism, including the 2013 amendments to the Criminal Code. Police had been trained to identify cases of extremism effectively. The special intelligence services had been also involved in monitoring the situation in this area.  104. Under national legislation, an organizer of a public assembly had been required to ensure an adequate number of stewards during a public assembly and, in case of need, the organizer had been entitled to request the assistance of the police. 105. The right to work was guaranteed in the constitution. Measures had been taken to address the issue of youth employment. 106. The delegation reiterated the commitment of the Government to continue promoting gender equality. Several new measures had been introduced to reduce the wage gap between men and women, including the start of a national awareness-raising campaign. 107. The Government had acknowledged the need of special support for early childhood education as a priority measure to ensure inclusive education for Roma children. A national project on inclusive education had identified another area that the Government was planning to focus on in order to ensure an adequate environment for Roma children in mainstream schools. 108. In conclusion, the delegation expressed its gratitude for the fruitful dialogue on the human rights situation in Slovakia. It thanked States for their questions submitted in advance and for all the questions raised during the dialogue. 109. The delegation stated that all recommendations would be subject to thorough consideration and examination. It emphasized the strong commitment of the Government to creating the conditions for the protection of and respect for human rights. The dialogue with civil society would significantly contribute to this task. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 110. The following recommendations will be examined by Slovakia which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-sixth session of the Human Rights Council in June 2014: 110.1. Reconsider the ratification of OP-CAT (Denmark); 110.2. Ratify OP-CAT (Estonia) (Hungary); 110.3. Ratify CPED and OP-CAT (Tunisia) (Chile); 110.4. Continue its efforts initiated to achieve ratification of CPED and accept the competence of the Committee on Enforced Disappearances (Argentina); 110.5. Ratify promptly CPED (Belgium); 110.6. Consider becoming party to ICRMW and to OP-CAT (Azerbaijan); 110.7. Ratify ICRMW (Algeria) (Egypt); 110.8. Consider the possibility of ratifying ICRMW (Ecuador); 110.9. Take a step further in the area of migrants’ rights protection and consider ratifying the ICRMW and ILO Convention no. 189 (Philippines); 110.10. Ratify ILO Conventions Nos. 169 and 189 (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 110.11. Ratify those international instruments, which have not yet been ratified (Côte d’Ivoire); 110.12. Favourably respond and react to future calls and recommendations of the Ombudswoman, particularly when it comes to the situation of Roma (Slovenia); 110.13. Implement recommendations made in the Office of the Ombudswoman’s extraordinary report related to human rights complaints on access to education, procedural guarantees in the demolition of illegal dwellings and police conduct (Canada); 110.14. Take all necessary steps to ensure that its national human rights institution is fully effective and independent in accordance with the Paris Principles (France); take appropriate measures to ensure that the national human rights institution functions in compliance with the Paris Principles (India); take further steps to ensure that its national human rights institution is aligned with the Paris Principles (Philippines); continue with its efforts for the establishment of independent national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Pakistan); undertake the necessary steps to ensure that its national institution is fully consistent with the Paris Principles (Morocco); take the necessary measures to strengthen the independence and mandate of the Slovak National Centre for Human Rights and ensure that it complies with the Paris Principles (Mexico);strengthen the independence and mandate of its National Centre for Human Rights so as to enable it to function in compliance with the Paris Principles (Malaysia); 110.15. Bring its National Centre for Human Rights into conformity with the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (Turkmenistan); 110.16. Continue working in order to establish a national human rights institution in line with the Paris Principles, taking into account the recommendations from the treaty bodies in this regard (Guatemala); 110.17. Continue its efforts to re-accredit the National Slovak Human Rights Centre as the national human rights institution, in compliance with the Paris Principles (Algeria); 110.18. Strengthen the independence and mandate of the National Slovak Human Rights Centre so that it operates in compliance with the Paris Principles and be given the necessary resources (Tunisia); 110.19. Strengthen the independence and the mandate of its national human rights institution and provide it with adequate financial and human resources to assist it in meeting the standards required by the Paris Principles (Ireland); 110.20. Allocate appropriate resources to the Office of the Ombudswoman to facilitate equal access to justice for all citizens and further strengthen its monitoring and reporting capacity (Canada); 110.21. Establish an independent mechanism to investigate complaints related to discrimination and segregation within the schooling system (Egypt); 110.22. Work with the EU and the UN for further participation of other important human rights mechanisms, including the protocols to the CRC (Viet Nam); 110.23. That the Government Council for Human Rights, National Minorities and Gender Equality take steps towards the implementation of a nation-wide strategy for the promotion and protection of human rights (United Kingdom); 110.24. Speed up the preparation of a national human rights promotion and protection strategy (Uruguay); 110.25. Promptly put in place the national strategy for the promotion and protection of human rights that integrates the contributions arising from this review (Nicaragua); 110.26. Continue its efforts and momentum on the current human rights programme, with more focus on social inclusion, participation of the Roma in employment opportunity, adequate housing, gender equality and capacity building for national human rights institutions in the country (Viet Nam); 110.27. Continue efforts to strengthen legal and institutional frameworks to promote and protect human rights, including through the ratification of ICRMW, formulation of a national human rights plan of action, and expediting the amendment process to the law regulating the NHRI so that it is fully in accordance with the Paris Principles (Indonesia); 110.28. Continue its efforts particularly to ensure equal treatment in the education system and equal access to job opportunities (France); 110.29. That a national action plan for the protection of the human rights of LGBTI persons in Slovakia is developed and implemented, within the context of the planned human rights strategy (Norway); 110.30. Develop additional programmes, including a national action plan for children, to enhance the protection and promotion of the rights of women and children (Philippines); 110.31. Further improve human rights records in the country (Azerbaijan); 110.32. Include in its National Strategy for Gender Equality 2009–2013 measures to promote the participation of women in decision-making bodies in the public and private sphere (Spain); 110.33. Expedite its implementation of the measures to ensure equality for men and women (Bangladesh); 110.34. Take steps to ensure equality between men and women that guarantee non-discrimination and gender equality (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 110.35. Strengthen measures aimed at ensuring gender equality as well as preventing violence against women (Côte d’Ivoire); 110.36. Take measures to effectively implement the prohibition of discrimination enshrined in the Anti-Discrimination Act (Pakistan); 110.37. Continue its efforts in effectively implementing the amendment to the Anti-Discrimination Act with a view to further combating discrimination in the country (Cambodia); 110.38. Enforce the legal and institutional framework on combating discrimination (Romania); 110.39. Take steps to effectively implement the ban on discrimination contained in the anti-discrimination law and the law on schools (Belgium); 110.40. Increase awareness raising programmes and campaigns to promote tolerance and respect for diversity among its population (Malaysia); 110.41. Continue awareness-raising programmes about racial and ethnic diversity in schools, strengthening the monitoring of the implementation of anti-discriminatory policies, especially in remote areas (Uruguay); 110.42. Step up efforts to combat prejudices against ethnic minorities and to improve relations between the general public and minority communities (Malaysia); 110.43. Intensify measures aiming at promoting tolerance, intercultural dialogue and the respect of diversity, strengthening awareness-raising campaigns (Spain);110.44.Take actions to combat discrimination and prejudice by promoting intercultural dialogue in cooperation with the media to prevent racist statements, hate speech and attacks against ethnic minorities and promote respect for cultural diversity (Thailand); 110.45. Continue to take measures to combat intolerance based on ethnic origin, in particular against the Roma community (Portugal); 110.46. Take the necessary measures to continue promoting a culture of tolerance and non-discrimination in Slovak society (Nicaragua); 110.47. Intensify efforts in the field of ethnic diversity, including by strengthening the inclusive and multicultural education system (Indonesia); 110.48. Take more resolute legal and practical measures to combat intolerance based on ethnic origin and take further steps to promote mutual understanding and respect between persons belonging to various groups (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 110.49. Adopt effective measures to prevent any manifestation of discrimination and racism (Uzbekistan); 110.50. Intensify efforts to combat discrimination against ethnic minorities, particularly Roma and migrants (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 110.51. Continue to intensify the necessary actions to eliminate discrimination as well as the trend and/or media dissemination of stereotypes, which may encourage discrimination against minorities, particularly against Roma and Hungarians. (Argentina); 110.52. Eradicate stereotypes and widespread abuse of Roma (Bangladesh); 110.53. Take concrete steps to further develop and implement initiatives targeting not only the Roma minority but also the majority population, including children and adults, in order to increase mutual understanding and respect with a view of combating the nourishment of societal discrimination against Roma (Denmark); 110.54. Make all necessary efforts to address discrimination against Roma, including in employment, education, health care, housing and loan practices (Australia); 110.55. Create effective administrative and judicial mechanisms to remedy discriminatory acts against Roma and other minorities (India); 110.56. Strengthen measures on combating discrimination against women and Roma, as well as eliminate stereotypes of Roma and indigenous people through awareness-raising campaigns (Azerbaijan); 110.57. Strengthen its efforts to combat racist attacks committed by law enforcement personnel, particularly against the Roma, by among others, providing special training to law enforcement personnel aimed at promoting respect for human rights and tolerance for diversity (Austria); 110.58. Unequivocally and publicly condemn attacks against Roma and other minorities whenever they occur and effectively investigate all reported cases of harassment of members of the Roma by the police forces (Austria); 110.59. Increase its efforts to combat racist attacks committed by law enforcement personnel, particularly against the Roma (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 110.60. Do all the necessary to prevent and effectively and thoroughly investigate all violent attacks against the Roma, including those committed by the police forces (Slovenia); 110.61. Enhance its efforts to curb hate speech in the media while investigating and appropriately sanctioning the perpetrators for such hate speeches (Bangladesh); 110.62. Modify the criminal codes to clearly address hate speech and racial and religious incitement in the context of election campaigns (Egypt); 110.63. Investigate and prosecute allegations of all hate speech and political discourse against minorities (Malaysia); 110.64. Investigate and punish all instances of racist statements or of intolerance of ethnic minorities in speeches by politicians and public officials (Mexico); 110.65. Step up its efforts towards advancing the specific courses of action taken in its struggle against discrimination such as programmes to fight poverty and social exclusion, the Strategy for Roma Integration up to 2020 and the endorsement of the Committee for the Rights of LGBTI persons, and launch campaigns to promote tolerance and respect for diversity aimed at all segments of society (Brazil); 110.66. Adopt effective measures to combat extremism and prevent all forms of discrimination, racism, xenophobia and other forms of intolerance, including amending its legislation so as to forbid and prevent activities of extremist organizations (Belarus); 110.67. Increase the monitoring of extremist organizations that act in a discriminatory manner, take effective measures against them, and criminalize and prosecute the financing and participation in those organizations (Spain); 110.68. Ban in law and prevent activities of the extremist organizations (Uzbekistan); 110.69. Step up its efforts to clamp down on racism and acts of extremism in line with its concept of combating extremism for 2011–2014 (China); 110.70. Continue to support the rights of the LGBTI community through its human rights framework (Australia); 110.71. Consider adopting measures to prevent gender-based violence, including amending legislation to include such an offence (Thailand); 110.72. Take steps for the comprehensive prohibition of corporal punishment, including when exercising parental rights (Estonia); 110.73. That legislation on the ban of corporal punishment in the exercise of parental rights be approved (Portugal); 110.74. Reinforce preventive measures for combating trafficking in women and girls for purposes such as sexual exploitation (Sri Lanka); 110.75. Implement effectively the National Plan of Action on Combating Human Trafficking (Turkmenistan); 110.76. Provide adequate resources to fully implement its National Programme to Combat Trafficking in Human Beings, paying particular attention to combating trafficking of children (Philippines); 110.77. Step up efforts in the area of combating trafficking in human beings, including measures on the protection, reintegration and rehabilitation of victims of human trafficking (Belarus); 110.78. Pay special attention to the adoption of comprehensive measures to address the aggravating problem of trafficking in children. Consider the possibility of sending an invitation to the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially in women and children (Belarus); 110.79 Continue to strengthen its policy to prevent, combat and punish human trafficking, particularly by providing assistance to victims, regardless of their nationality (Cyprus); 110.80. Adopt measures to identify the root causes for the exploitation of children, including through prostitution and pornography, and implement adequate mechanisms for prevention and protection (Ecuador); 110.81. Continue to fight human trafficking in all its forms paying special attention to the situation of the victims (Romania); 110.82. Ensure that assistance is provided to all victims of human trafficking and that the authorities devise specific programmes aiming at the reintegration of victims of human trafficking into the labour market and education system (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 110.83. Ensure close cooperation between the police and the NGOs which provide assistance to victims of trafficking in human beings (Slovenia); 110.84. Improve identification of the victims of trafficking in human beings by setting up a coherent national mechanism of identification and referral of such cases (Republic of Moldova); 110.85. Ensure that child victims of offences under OP-CRC-SC are provided with assistance, including social reintegration and physical and psychological recovery (Republic of Moldova); 110.86. That the Government of Slovakia work to raise awareness amongst vulnerable communities of the dangers of human exploitation and to ensure these communities receive adequate support (United Kingdom); 110.87. Ensure full independence of the judiciary system (Turkmenistan); 110.88. That necessary reforms to ensure proper functioning and legitimacy of the judiciary are undertaken, in a transparent and inclusive process with all stakeholders including the civil society (Norway); 110.89. Take effective measures to ensure full independence of the Judicial Council, and the independence of the judiciary (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 110.90. Take measures to strengthen the full independence of its legal system and shorten the time it takes for cases to go through the courts in order to boost the population’s confidence in the legal system (France); 110.91. Fully implement the European Commission’s 2013 recommendations related to the reform of public administration and the efficiency of the judicial system (United States); 110.92. Investigate and prosecute all perpetrators of violence and hate crimes against Roma (Azerbaijan); 110.93. Ensure appropriate investigation of all acts of violence committed for racial motives and punish those responsible for them (Uzbekistan); 110.94. Take all necessary measures to prevent illegal treatment by law enforcement bodies, ensure impartial investigation of all reports of torture and ill-treatment in order to bring the offenders to justice (Uzbekistan); 110.95. Investigate and prosecute all perpetrators of violence and hate crimes against Roma and amend the Criminal Code so as to introduce and adopt stronger punishments for racially motivated crimes committed by police officers (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 110.96. Conduct immediate and impartial investigation of all reports on torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, bring those found guilty to justice and provide compensation to victims (Belarus); 110.97. Make sure that all victims of discrimination have access to effective remedies and the means to obtain them (Belgium); 110.98. Ensure effective legal protection for victims of discrimination (Pakistan); 110.99. Consider establishing an independent body with the right to undertake unannounced visits to all places of deprivation of liberty, including police stations and pretrial detention facilities, with a view to an early ratification of OP-CAT(Czech Republic); 110.100. Continue to take all necessary steps to combat corruption, ensure judicial independence and promote a fair and transparent legal system for all Slovak citizens (Australia); 110.101. Sustain and promote the family, based on the stable relationship between a man and a woman, as the natural and fundamental unit of society (Holy See); 110.102. Continue to strengthen efforts to eliminate discrimination in employment and occupation faced particularly by women and Roma persons, pursuant to the recommendations of ILO supervisory bodies (United States); 110.103. Implement measures that guarantee the right to work to its citizens, in particular to youth under the age of 25 and women (Cuba); 110.104. Bridge the wage gap between men and women (Libya); 110.105. Better ensure the effective enforcement of laws against sexual harassment and adopt additional preventive and protective measures to combat sexual violence in the workplace (Netherlands); 110.106. Take measures to guarantee access to safe drinking water for all its population (Chile); 110.107. Increase inputs to help to improve the living standards of people living in poverty and create more job opportunities for women, youth and other special groups (China); 110.108. Adopt a comprehensive programme on sexual health and reproductive rights based on human rights and WHO standards and allocate sufficient financial and human resources for their implementation (Belgium); 110.109. Increase access to contraceptive methods for all women as required by CESCR (Belgium); 110.110. Continue to safeguard the choice of health-care workers to have recourse to the principle of conscientious objection (Holy See); 110.111. Maintain the protection of the right to life from conception to natural death following article 15 of the Slovak constitution that states: “Human life is worthy of protection even prior to birth” (Holy See); 110.112. Ensure women's access to quality sexual education as well as to condoms and other means necessary for the practice of an informed and responsible sexual health (Mexico); 110.113. Adopt a comprehensive programme on sexual and reproductive health and rights, based on international human rights and WHO standards, and involve non-governmental organizations working on women’s rights and on reproductive rights in the preparation and implementation of this programme (Netherlands); 110.114. Continue pursuing appropriate and efficient policies aimed at further improving access to education for socially disadvantaged children and consider, if necessary, the adoption of additional measures (Czech Republic); 110.115. Continue efforts to develop the capacities of the institutions that deal with disabled persons (Oman); 110.116. Improve legislation in the area of the protection of the rights of the national minorities (Russian Federation); 110.117. Continue improving the protection of national minorities in Slovakia, such as through institutional and legislative developments (Montenegro); 110.118. Support the preservation and development of the cultures of national minorities (Sri Lanka); 110.119. Adopt positive policies to include representatives of minorities at various levels in national and local government (Uruguay); 110.120. In line with the suggestions of the Council of Europe, improve efforts to provide adequate opportunities for children belonging to minorities to learn their mother tongue and to study in their mother tongue in schools (Hungary); 110.121. Fully implement its National Roma Integration Strategy to combat socioeconomic marginalization and discrimination and continue to condemn all acts of violence against Roma persons (United States); continue to implement the Strategy for Roma Integration up to 2020 (Angola); reinforce the provisions of the Strategy for the Integration of Roma (Chile); take all necessary measures to implement the National Roma Integration Strategy. This includes the provision of financial means regarding the efficient implementation of this Strategy (Austria); 110.122. Strengthen its obligations under the Strategy for Roma Integration with a view to effectively combating racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and other interrelated forms of intolerance (Cuba); 110.123. Continue with activities towards implementing the revised National Action Plan for the Decade of Roma Inclusion for 2011–2015 and the adopted Strategy for the Integration of Roma up to 2020 (Montenegro); 110.124. Assess the implementation of the Strategy for Roma Integration up to 2020 annually and keep Roma NGOs, including women’s and children’s organizations, actively involved in the implementation and assessment of the strategy (Finland); 110.125. Promote a more effective policy aimed at integrating Roma on issues related to education, employment, housing and health, that will produce positive results (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 110.126. Focus on education as the most important part of a long term sustainable solution for the Roma population and have patience and perseverance with this work. Roma children must be given the same opportunities and not put in schools aimed at mentally challenged students (Sweden); 110.127. Strengthen efforts to include Roma children in mainstream education (Sri Lanka); 110.128. Introduce a clear duty on all schools to desegregate education and end discrimination against Romani children (Israel); 110.129. That further steps are taken in order to review existing policies and practices that lead to segregation of Roma children in schools (Portugal); adopt a concrete plan and measures leading to the abolition of segregated settings and achievement of better education outcomes for children from Romani communities (Austria); 110.130. Take measures that ensure that children of ethnic minorities can remain within the school system. In this regard, it is suggested that these measures are implemented at the level of local governments with an important number of Roma or Hungarian population residing there and that adequate follow-up of the progress is carried out in this regard (Uruguay); 110.131. Adopt and implement a sound legal framework and appropriate policies to address the issue of discriminatory practices against Roma in the education system, utilizing the definition of segregation provided by the case law of the European Court of Human Rights and of the regional court in Pre.ov, including measures to ensure that the court’s definition of ethnic segregation in education is disseminated and promoted to the relevant stakeholders (Ireland); 110.132. Further increase its efforts to end the segregation of Roma children in schools by tasking an appropriate authority with the clear responsibility of identifying segregation and giving schools binding guidelines to end segregating practices (Finland); 110.133. Establish a task force of relevant ministries and civil society organizations to develop a plan to desegregate Roma education and to ensure the necessary resources are available to begin implementation (Canada); 110.134. That appropriate steps are taken to ensure inclusive education in Slovak schools and to desegregate students that have been placed in special classes or special schools on other grounds than mental disability (Norway); 110.135. Intensify efforts to increase the rate of registration and participation in the educational system of Roma children (Albania); 110.136. Adopt a national strategy and plan of action to ensure access to adequate and acceptable education for Roma children (Uzbekistan); 110.137. Pay particular attention to the provision of adequate basic services to the Roma population, such as drinking water, sanitation, electricity and systems of sewage and waste disposal (Spain); 110.138. Ensure that housing policies are motivated by the integration of Roma and other marginalized and vulnerable groups and that they avoid all forms of exclusion or forced segregation (Mexico); 110.139. Put an end to forced evictions and demolition of Roma settlements without previous notice and, if such cases take place, offer alternative housing solutions (Spain); 110.140. Make sure to strike a balance between the need to give Roma a chance to own their own land and the risk of cemented segregation that might bring. Giving the Roma the chance to buy out the now, sometimes illegal, lands of settlements would create better possibilities also to claim the need for sanitation and municipal services (Sweden); 110.141. Stop the land segregation that has fomented the building of walls and barriers in areas such as Pre.ov, Michalovce, Partizanske or Trebi.ov (Spain); 110.142. Take steps to facilitate access to education, health and housing for the Roma community (India); 110.143. Take further measures for the sustainable development of the Roma community with a focus on their integration into mainstream society (India); 110.144. Step up its efforts in order to improve the participation of the Roma minority in parliament, having in view the fact that one Roma candidate was elected in the parliamentary elections in 20121 (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia); 110.145. Put in place mechanisms to identify at an early stage children among refugees and asylum seekers who might have been involved in armed conflict in order to ensure their protection, recovery and reintegration (Bulgaria); 110.146. Implement laws and policies that protect and promote the civil, political, social and economic rights of migrants, Roma people, refugees and asylum seekers, especially the rights to health, to education and to work (Holy See); 111. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. 1 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue was: “Step up its efforts in order to improve the participation of Roma minority in the Parliament having in view the fact that no Roma candidate was elected on the parliamentary elections in 2010” (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia). Annex 
[English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of Slovakia was headed by Mr. Peter Javor.ík, State Secretary, Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs of the Slovak Republic and composed of the following members: • Fedor Rosocha, Ambassador, Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of the 
Slovak Republic to the UN in Geneva; 
• Peter Klenovsk., 	Director, Human Rights Department, Ministry of Foreign and 
European Affairs of the Slovak Republic; 
• Michal Van.o, Cabinet of the State Secretary, Ministry of Foreign and European 
Affairs of the Slovak Republic; 
• Elena Szolgayová, Director General, Directorate for Housing Policy and Municipal 
Development, Ministry of Transport, Construction and Regional Development of the 
Slovak Republic; 
• Mario Miklo.i, Director General, Directorate for Health Policy, Ministry of Health 
of the Slovak Republic; 
• Vladimír .imo.ák, Director, Department of Foreign and European Affairs, Ministry 
of Interior of the Slovak Republic; 
• Ján Hero, Director, Department for Concept and Planning, Office of the Government 
Plenipotentiary for Roma Communities; 
• So.a Danová, Head of Division for National Minorities, Human Rights Department, 
Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs of the Slovak Republic; 
• Branislav Kadle.ík, Department of International Public Law, Ministry of Justice of 
the Slovak Republic; 
• Katarína Ondrá.ová, Division for schools with minority language as a language of 
instruction and for Roma communities, Ministry of Education, Science, Research 
and Sport of the Slovak Republic; 
• Luká. Berinec, Department for International	 and European Affairs, Ministry of 
Labour, Social Affairs and Family of the Slovak Republic; 
• Martin Kmo.ena, Counsellor, DPR, Permanent Mission of the Slovak Republic to 
the UN in Geneva; 
• Silvia .i.márová, Intern, Permanent Mission of the Slovak Republic to the UN in 
Geneva. 
