  United Nations  A/HRC/23/13    General Assembly  Distr.: General 21 March 2013  Original: English  Human Rights Council Twenty-third session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   United Arab Emirates Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–127 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–22 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  23–127 5  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  128–129 16  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  27 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review (UPR), established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its fifteenth session from 21 January to 1 February 2013. The review of the United Arab Emirates was held at the 12th meeting, held on 28 January 2013. The delegation of the United Arab Emirates was headed by the Minister of Foreign Affairs Anwar Mohammad Gargash. At its 16th meeting, held on 31 January 2013, the Working Group adopted the report on the United Arab Emirates. 2. On 14 January 2013, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of the United Arab Emirates: Ethiopia, Germany and Thailand. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of the United Arab Emirates:  (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/15/ARE/1 and Corr.1);  (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/15/ARE/2);  (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/15/ARE/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by the Netherlands, Norway, Mexico, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to the United Arab Emirates through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the UPR.  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The head of the United Arab Emirates delegation noted that the UPR process represented a beacon for the cause of human rights worldwide and an unparalleled opportunity for the United Arab Emirates to promote a transparent and inclusive approach to human rights. He described steps undertaken since the 2008 UPR in order to implement the outcomes of that review, noting that, in 2010, a committee comprised of Government bodies and advisers from civil society had been set up to ensure follow-up to commitments made. The committee now acted as a permanent forum for the consultative process with civil society and had conducted a wide consultation with stakeholders in preparing the national report for the 2013 UPR. 6. The delegation recalled that at the 2008 UPR, the United Arab Emirates had accepted 36 recommendations and made 9 additional voluntary pledges, of which more than 90 per cent were implemented. The report of the United Arab Emirates for the 2013 UPR demonstrated the efforts made to act on the findings of the review, and the continuous progress achieved. 7. The delegation explained that the United Arab Emirates had a stable political system characterized by a consultative relationship between its citizens and its Government, the application of the rule of law and good governance. Although the United Arab Emirates took pride in its achievements, it was never satisfied with the status quo and was strongly committed to further improving the situation. The Government took concerns of any possible violation of human rights very seriously and was constantly working to strengthen its capacity to respond to these. 8. The delegation then outlined measures taken since 2008 to enhance the legislative and institutional frameworks for the promotion of human rights, noting that the Constitution had been amended in 2009, and that the tenure of the Federal National Council members had been extended to four years. 9. He explained that the United Arab Emirates had implemented diverse legislative initiatives, including measures to strengthen the rights of workers and of persons with disabilities, and that it was in the process of adopting a federal law concerning children’s rights. 10. The delegation highlighted that several governmental entities concerned with human rights had been established, and that studies had been carried out on national human rights institutions with a view to informing decisions about the institutional framework in the United Arab Emirates. 11. Noting that the engagement of the United Arab Emirates with the international community in the field of human rights needed to be multifaceted, the United Arab Emirates noted that it was studying the accession to international conventions, in addition to further cooperation with treaty bodies and special procedures, the UPR and the activities of the Human Rights Council. In this vein, the United Arab Emirates had already acceded to various international conventions, including, most recently, the Convention against Torture. The United Arab Emirates would continue to review and actively consider ratification of other international human rights instruments. 12. Furthermore, the United Arab Emirates welcomed visits by United Nations Special Rapporteurs and had received visits by the Special Rapporteur on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography, and the Special Rapporteur on Racism and Racial Discrimination in 2009, and by the Special Rapporteur on Trafficking in Persons in 2012. 13. On labour rights, the delegation explained that the United Arab Emirates had an extensive strategy for safeguarding the rights of workers and improving their work and living conditions, and that it was fully committed to strengthening the rights of workers so that they could enjoy opportunity in the United Arab Emirates, free of any form of abuse or exploitation. Measures to protect labour rights included (a) the conclusion of memoranda of understanding with major labour-exporting countries; (b) regulations protecting the rights of workers in case of disputes with employers; (c) a new wage protection system introduced in 2009; (d) measures guaranteeing decent and safe accommodation for workers; (e) provisions regarding medical care; and (f) rights for workers to move from one job to another without time limitations. In addition, the Government had recently approved a new law to protect domestic workers, which would be issued this year and would afford far greater protection. 14. The delegation further emphasized that the right to practice religion freely was a firmly protected right. 15. Regarding women’s rights, the delegation highlighted the strong record of the United Arab Emirates, noting that women participated meaningfully in every facet of civic and political life, and that in December 2012, the Cabinet had made it compulsory for corporations and Government agencies to include women on their boards of directors. Women also played an important role in the Federal National Council and occupied leadership positions in different institutions. For example, there were four women in the Federal Cabinet and there were a number of female federal judges. Furthermore, women were major contributors to the United Arab Emirates economy. Thus, the Council of Businesswomen in the United Arab Emirates had more than 12,000 members, who ran more than 11,000 ventures, with an estimated value of $3.4 billion. 16. In 2011 the United Arab Emirates had taken another important step in cementing the rights of women when the United Arab Emirates President issued a decree according citizenship rights to children born to Emirati women but whose father is not Emirati. It accords them citizenship rights, and at the age of 18 they have the choice of taking United Arab Emirates nationality or retaining the father’s nationality. The Government was taking the implementation of recommendations on women’s rights very seriously and was in the process of adopting a National Strategy for the Advancement of Women for 2013 to 2017. 17. Regarding human trafficking, the delegation noted that the United Arab Emirates was committed to the global effort to combat this phenomenon and was taking a lead on this issue regionally. It was the first country in the Arab region to enact a comprehensive anti-trafficking law, and remarkable progress had been made since 2007 on the United Arab Emirates’ anti-trafficking strategy. Related initiatives had included (a) training courses and workshops; (b) a media campaign to enhance public awareness; (c) a strategy to combat all forms of forced labour; and (d) an expansion in the number of shelters for women and children victims of human trafficking and sexual exploitation. 18. Regarding the United Arab Emirates’ international commitments, the delegation noted that in 2011 the United Arab Emirates had disbursed a total of $2.1 billion in grants and loans to development, humanitarian and charity programmes worldwide. 19. The United Arab Emirates also highlighted its attention to organizing workshops focused on spreading human rights principles among law enforcement authorities in charge of combating terrorism, and the allocation of significant resources to infrastructure development in remote areas. 20. The progress achieved in the United Arab Emirates was also evidenced by its ranking in the United Nations’ Human Development Index, which indicated that the United Arab Emirates had the highest level of human development in the Arab world. 21. Referring to challenges in connection with the turbulence in the Arab world over the previous two years, the delegation stated that the United Arab Emirates had worked to maintain its stability and security, protect the progressive nature of its society and prevent extremism from gaining a foothold. Noting that every country had to find the right balance between preserving civil liberties and maintaining national security, the delegation stated that the United Arab Emirates had not shied away from its responsibility to protect national security, but would continue to exercise this responsibility strictly within the framework of its constitution, laws and judicial practices, with due respect for international human rights principles. 22. In this vein, the head of delegation reaffirmed the United Arab Emirates’ commitment to the promotion of human rights and to multilateral engagement, including through the UPR process.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 23. During the interactive dialogue, 88 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in chapter II of the present report. 24. Armenia noted the Government’s positive approach towards the visit of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special Rapporteur on racism. It commended the Government’s commitment to education and steps taken to incorporate human rights into compulsory education. It noted the National Strategy for the advancement of women. It made recommendations. 25. Canada recalled the United Arab Emirates’ 2008 pledge to establish a National Human Rights Institution (NHRI) and enquired about progress. It welcomed steps to improve the living and working conditions of migrant workers, promote values of equality and respect international refugee protection standards despite the absence of a regulating framework. It made recommendations. 26. Austria enquired about steps to better protect religious minorities and ensure freedom of religion and belief. It also asked about the time frame for the enactment of the new legislation on domestic workers and implementation measures. It made recommendations. 27. Azerbaijan congratulated the United Arab Emirates on its accession to certain human rights instruments. It commended efforts to empower women, including through legislative reform. It noted the improvement of education through the establishment of education councils. It made recommendations. 28. Bahrain commended the adoption of legislation and national plans concerning the elderly, the protection of migrant workers, the care of children of unknown parents and the empowerment of women. It wished to know whether there was a mechanism for consulting civil society on human rights policies and legislation. Bahrain made recommendations. 29. Bangladesh welcomed Government efforts to consolidate the human rights situation and commended the formulation of a strategy regarding migrant workers’ rights. It requested information on measures taken to protect the wages of workers. It made a recommendation. 30. Belarus noted the commitment of the United Arab Emirates to combat human trafficking. It welcomed its accession to the Palermo Protocol and its cooperation with the Special Rapporteurs on human trafficking and on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography. It noted the high level of medical care provided to citizens. It made recommendations. 31. Belgium commended efforts to give effect to the results of the first cycle review and encouraged the United Arab Emirates to continue on this path. It was concerned about restrictions to freedoms of expression and association. It made recommendations. 32. Bhutan noted the establishment of a National Committee to Combat Human Trafficking and asked about mechanisms to support victims of trafficking. It encouraged the United Arab Emirates to continue its cooperation with human rights mechanisms. It made a recommendation. 33. Brazil recognized efforts made against human trafficking and on migrant workers. It was encouraged by measures to expand women’s opportunities and asked which national policies, measures and legislation were in place to address racial discrimination. It made recommendations. 34. Brunei Darussalam welcomed steps to strengthen women’s rights. It was also encouraged by initiatives to ensure the right to education, such as the project to integrate young persons with special needs in schools. It commended the United Arab Emirates’ role as host to the headquarters of the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). It made a recommendation. 35. Burkina Faso noted the ratification of several international human rights instruments, bills under consideration regarding migrant workers and the rights of the child, and the establishment of a centre for child protection. It made recommendations. 36. Australia welcomed the United Arab Emirates’ efforts to eliminate gender-based discrimination, including through granting citizenship rights to all children of United Arab Emirates women. It encouraged further measures to strengthen the human rights framework, including regarding freedoms of expression and assembly. It made recommendations. 37. Chad commended the will of the Government to improve the protection of human rights, in particular through constitutional amendments and adoption of legislation. It encouraged the United Arab Emirates to continue its cooperation with human rights mechanisms to remove all obstacles to the full enjoyment of all rights. 38. Chile commended measures adopted to promote human rights and the ratification of various conventions. It welcomed the importance placed by the authorities on evaluating existing strategies to promote women’s rights. It made recommendations. 39. China commended the United Arab Emirates on achievements in advancing the empowerment of women, the protection of rights of children, persons with disabilities and the elderly, and its investment in health, education and social protection. It noted with satisfaction the Government’s focus on the green economy and sustainable resources. It made recommendations. 40. Costa Rica highlighted the absence of a prohibition of discrimination based on national origin, and noted that the kafala system often stripped workers of protection in law and in practice. It echoed concern expressed by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) regarding the trafficking of women and children. It made recommendations. 41. Côte d’Ivoire applauded initiatives in respect of child rights and human rights training targeted at Government officials and police officers. It invited the Government to continue such training, improve its implementation and extend its scope. It made recommendations. 42. Cuba commended the steady progress made by the United Arab Emirates in promoting and protecting human rights. Cuba asked what measures had been taken to promote the right to education. It made recommendations. 43. Cyprus acknowledged the commitment of the United Arab Emirates to protect the rights of migrant workers, including through legislative decisions, and to ensure their access to decent housing. It encouraged the United Arab Emirates to consider ratifying International Labour Organization (ILO) Conventions Nos. 87 and 98. It made recommendations. 44. Denmark was concerned about alleged violations of freedoms of expression, assembly and association, including attempts to deprive political activists of their citizenship. It welcomed the signing of the Rome Statute and asked about its possible ratification. It made recommendations. 45. Djibouti welcomed the adoption of policies to strengthen human rights. It asked what results had been achieved following the Government’s introduction of the principles of human rights in the country’s education programme and what actions the State had taken to promote participation in political life for future generations. 46. Ecuador noted that the country had fulfilled many of the commitments and recommendations from the first cycle regarding the ratification of international conventions. It also welcomed efforts towards the achievement of gender equality in society. It made recommendations. 47. Egypt commended steps such as the establishment of human rights departments within ministries, a department to combat trafficking in persons, and shelters for women and the victims of trafficking. It made recommendations.  48. Estonia commended the country for its ratification of the Committee against Torture (CAT) and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children. It welcomed measures to promote migrant workers’ rights and combat human trafficking, and urged the Government to continue its efforts to that end. It made recommendations. 49. Ethiopia welcomed the national plan to implement the recommendations from the first cycle. It requested clarification on measures to protect the rights of migrant workers and encouraged the United Arab Emirates to continue its active engagement with the countries of origin. It made a recommendation. 50. Finland was concerned that the United Arab Emirates was not party to many important human rights instruments and requested information regarding the ratification of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR). It also expressed concern about the country’s reservations to CEDAW. It made recommendations. 51. France commended efforts to strengthen protection of human rights, particularly with regard to migrant workers and women. It congratulated the United Arab Emirates on its ratification of CAT and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD). It made recommendations. 52. The United Arab Emirates delegation, commenting on questions related to religious tolerance, stated that this was a major success story of the United Arab Emirates as it had successfully married Muslim tradition with the presence of various other religious practices in the country. The United Arab Emirates had also successfully handled situations in which it had been crucial to reconcile national security with an open society and freedom of expression. Regarding women, the delegation said that the United Arab Emirates had one of the most progressive records in the region. 53. Regarding labour issues, the delegation stated that, in 2008, the United Arab Emirates had set up an Office for the protection of wages to ensure that workers were paid in accordance with their contracts. Since 2010, a decision had allowed workers to move to another company after expiration of their contracts, or upon non-respect of their contracts by their employers. Moreover, the Ministry of Interior had taken efforts to ensure that foreign passports could not be withheld except by a legal order, although workers could choose to keep their passports with their employers. The United Arab Emirates had also worked with labour-exporting countries to ensure respect for workers and prevent their exploitation. 54. Regarding accession to international conventions, the representative of the United Arab Emirates stated that the country was considering accession to some conventions. With regard to ICCPR and ICESCR, the United Arab Emirates was in the process of considering whether those Covenants were compatible with national legislation and relevant cultural and religious values. With regard to reservations to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), the United Arab Emirates was studying whether it would be possible to withdraw some of them, as recommended by a recent study. Concerning reservations to CEDAW, the United Arab Emirates intended to ensure equality between men and women first before addressing this issue. Regarding the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (OPCAT), the United Arab Emirates reiterated that it had ratified CAT only in 2012 and that it would look into this matter in the near future. With regard to the Rome Statute signed in November 2000, the United Arab Emirates would take the common position of Arab countries concerning its ratification. 55. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland encouraged the United Arab Emirates to strengthen the protection of foreign workers, including by implementing legislation to curb abuses and improve working conditions. It also urged the United Arab Emirates to establish a National Human Rights Institution and abolish the death penalty. It made recommendations. 56. Greece asked about efforts to establish a national independent human rights institution. It requested further information on the results of actions taken with regard to trafficking in persons. Lastly, it asked the United Arab Emirates to provide an evaluation of its actions concerning human rights education. It made a recommendation. 57. Guatemala welcomed the incorporation of human rights departments within various ministries. It welcomed also the ratification of CAT and CRPD. It urged the United Arab Emirates to continue initiatives to ensure that all women may fully exercise their rights and freedoms on an equal footing with men. It made a recommendation. 58. Hungary congratulated the United Arab Emirates on its high ranking in the index on the rule of law and judicial transparency. It noted that the United Arab Emirates ranked first in the Arab world in the gender equality index published by the World Economic Forum in 2011. It made a recommendation. 59. India hoped that adequate monitoring mechanisms were in place to ensure the implementation of domestic legislation. It welcomed the wide range of interrelated national policies and strategies, and legislation to improve women’s rights. It urged the United Arab Emirates to implement the Electronic Contract and Validation System. It made recommendations. 60. Indonesia commended the United Arab Emirates’ ranking in development according to the Human Development Report. It welcomed various measures to empower women. It encouraged the United Arab Emirates to continue its exemplary role in the promotion of human rights in the region. It made recommendations. 61. Iraq noted the United Arab Emirates’ commitment to advance in the area of human rights and the measures adopted since the first UPR. It commended the ratification of CAT. It requested further information on measures taken to protect the rights of the elderly. It made a recommendation. 62. Ireland encouraged the United Arab Emirates to establish a human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles. It stressed the importance of ensuring that the Internet remained an open, global and public forum and that freedom of expression was fully respected. It made recommendations.  63. Italy asked how the United Arab Emirates intended to address the problem of consular assistance for foreign nationals detained by United Arab Emirates authorities. It was concerned about recurrent cases of gender violence and asked if the United Arab Emirates envisaged ad hoc measures aimed at better preventing such violence. It made recommendations. 64. Japan hoped that newly created national human rights organizations would function effectively to further improve the human rights situation. It noted concerns about the detention of human rights defenders and hoped that the United Arab Emirates would eliminate such concerns by releasing information. It made recommendations. 65. Jordan appreciated the United Arab Emirates’ institutional and legislative advances, including federal laws on the rights of disabled persons. It commended the creation of a Human Rights Department at the Interior Ministry and operational measures to improve the conditions of foreign workers. It asked about efforts to promote human rights in developing countries. It made a recommendation. 66. Kenya noted the United Arab Emirates’ commitment to improving human rights. It encouraged the United Arab Emirates to establish a national human rights institution. Kenya made a recommendation. 67. Kuwait noted the United Arab Emirates’ commitment to strengthening political, economic, social and cultural rights, as well as freedom of the media and the press through a new federal bill on the mass media. It asked what mechanisms had been established to spread the culture of political participation. It made a recommendation. 68. Latvia took note of the United Arab Emirates’ cooperation with Special Procedures and of the visits by the Special Rapporteurs on racism, sale of children and trafficking in persons, since 2009. It made recommendations. 69. Lebanon welcomed the concrete steps to implement the recommendations from the first UPR cycle. It requested more information about the empowerment of women and their political participation. Lebanon made a recommendation. 70. Libya welcomed the United Arab Emirates’ policies and strategies, including on promoting women’s and children’s rights, combatting human trafficking, protecting workers’ rights and raising the level of education. It made recommendations. 71. Malaysia applauded the United Arab Emirates’ efforts in its human rights awareness raising programme, its promotion and protection of women’s and children’s rights and in its development of rural areas. It also commended the United Arab Emirates for its accession to CRPD. Malaysia made recommendations. 72. The Maldives congratulated the United Arab Emirates for progress in women’s and labour rights, and its strengthening of institutions. It requested to know about initiatives to develop infrastructure in remote areas. It made recommendations. 73. Mauritania appreciated the United Arab Emirates’ commitment to human rights, and its accession to various international instruments. It also appreciated action regarding the rights to education and health care, social protection and decent living conditions, gender equality, protection of the rights of the child, people with special needs and the elderly. It made a recommendation. 74. Mexico applauded the establishment of governmental bodies and public institutions for the defence of human rights, as well as regulations to guarantee the protection of women’s physical and moral integrity, and their participation in political life. It made recommendations. 75. Montenegro took note of the United Arab Emirates’ willingness to promote the role of women in society and eradicate human trafficking, but expressed concern that discrimination against women persisted. Montenegro made recommendations. 76. Morocco noted the progress made towards greater enjoyment of fundamental freedoms and human rights. It commended measures to spread a human rights culture, especially through the education system and relevant judicial training. It asked the United Arab Emirates to clarify the steps taken to introduce the human rights guiding principles and its relation to the business sector. It made recommendations. 77. Nepal appreciated the United Arab Emirates’ launching of national human rights strategies. It also commended the United Arab Emirates’ efforts in empowering women, protecting the rights of children, the elderly and persons with disabilities, and in promoting education, health care and social welfare. Nepal made recommendations. 78. The Netherlands commended the United Arab Emirates for its developments in several areas. It called upon the United Arab Emirates to extend a standing invitation to Special Procedures. It made recommendations. 79. Nicaragua highlighted the work of the United Arab Emirates since its last review, including the revision of its regulatory framework and the development of policies to strengthen the human rights system, particularly the rights of vulnerable groups. It encouraged the country to ratify new international instruments. It made a recommendation. 80. Norway expressed concern at the deterioration in freedom of expression and at reports of arbitrary detentions and arrests. It welcomed steps to improve the conditions of migrant workers, the forthcoming establishment of a human rights institution and the amendments to the law on citizenship. Norway made recommendations. 81. Oman noted that the United Arab Emirates was forging ahead with comprehensive developments to guarantee the fundamental rights of its individuals through political commitment and a package of legislations on rights such as health, education, security, non-discrimination and equality, and freedom of opinion and belief. 82. Pakistan appreciated the Government’s efforts in honouring its voluntary pledges through accession to CAT and CRPD. It took note of the adoption of a manual on general standards for shared housing for workers, as well as the care for children of unknown parentage. It made recommendations. 83. The head of the United Arab Emirates delegation responded to various comments, including on labour issues, noting that improvements had been made in the labour conditions but that this was an area that would need continuous improvement in the United Arab Emirates. He welcomed comments from delegates from major labour-exporting countries who had highlighted their good cooperation with the United Arab Emirates on labour issues. The United Arab Emirates welcomed the increased transparency that had been brought about by the UPR process, and the capacity-building that had been undertaken in relation to the UPR. Human rights had also increasingly become part of the training of the police, and now had departments responsible for it in the Ministry of Interior, and other Government Ministries. Regarding cooperation with United Nations mechanisms, the United Arab Emirates confirmed that it welcomed visits by Special Rapporteurs and looked forward to further constructive engagement. 84. On the issue of a group recently detained in the United Arab Emirates, the delegation explained that the country had to deal with the challenge of extremist organizations, which did not share the United Arab Emirates’ progressive vision of society, including the empowerment of women and pursuing religious tolerance. The United Arab Emirates would not abandon its progressive agenda because of different views held by a small minority. However, the issue would be addressed in accordance with due process and in line with the United Arab Emirates’ legal framework, and the cases concerned had now been sent to Court. 85. On human trafficking, the delegation noted that a campaign had been launched after the adoption of Law No. 51 (2006). A National Commission and a national strategy to combat human trafficking had been put in place. The Commission had been working on legislation to implement Law No. 51. Measures taken included training and awareness-raising activities, the adoption of punitive and deterrent measures, and programmes to protect and rehabilitate victims. The National Commission also pursued bilateral cooperation with countries concerned, as well as the development of a regional Arab initiative together with the Arab League. 86. The State of Palestine valued the efforts made by the United Arab Emirates in areas such as women rights, combatting racial discrimination, and the right to education. It welcomed the United Arab Emirates’ accession to the Palermo Protocol and its establishment of ministerial departments for human rights. It paid tribute to efforts in combatting trafficking of persons. It made recommendations. 87. The Philippines commended the United Arab Emirates for acceding to the Palermo Protocol and protecting the rights of migrant workers. It appreciated its active leadership and engagement in regional consultations on labour migration. It made recommendations. 88. Portugal noted the United Arab Emirates’ strategic plan to combat human trafficking. It welcomed the United Arab Emirates’ commitment to women’s rights and their empowerment. It made a recommendation. 89. Qatar paid tribute to efforts made at institutional and legislative levels such as the establishment of ministerial departments for human rights and the formulation of strategies including the “Emirates Vision 2021”. It appreciated the United Arab Emirates’ voluntary pledges made during the first UPR cycle and its accession to international instruments including CAT and CRPD. It made recommendations. 90. Saudi Arabia paid tribute to the United Arab Emirates’ cooperation with international mechanisms and procedures. The United Arab Emirates continued its political, judicial and social reforms and the strengthening of human rights institutions, thereby seeking a dignified life and bright future for its people. It made recommendations. 91. Senegal was pleased to note the United Arab Emirates’ advances in human development and in the promotion of women’s rights. It also noted measures to fight human trafficking and improve the situation of migrant workers. It made a recommendation. 92. Serbia commended the United Arab Emirates’ efforts in protecting children’s rights. It noted activities of the National Committee to Combat Human Trafficking and the National Programme of Assistance for Victims of Human Trafficking. It made a recommendation. 93. Singapore noted the United Arab Emirates’ achievement in promoting gender equality and its high Gender Equality Index, the compulsory inclusion of women on boards of directors and the creation of a National Committee to Combat Human Trafficking. It made recommendations. 94. Slovakia commended the United Arab Emirates for ratifying CRPD, CAT and the Convention against Transnational Organised Crime and Palermo Protocol. It noted the high educational levels attained by citizens and equal enrolment rates for boys and girls. It noted that Emirati women married to foreigners were allowed to transfer their citizenship to their children. It made recommendations. 95. Slovenia welcomed the United Arab Emirates’ accession to several human rights treaties, and the consideration of ratifying the Optional Protocol to CRC on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (OP-CRC-SC) and the Optional Protocol to CRC on the involvement of children in armed conflict (OP-CRC-AC). It welcomed the establishment of shelters for women and children victims of domestic violence. It made recommendations. 96. Spain congratulated United Arab Emirates for its commitment to the UPR process, as demonstrated by the national plan to implement the recommendations from the first cycle. It noted the ratifications of CAT and CRPD. It made recommendations. 97. Sri Lanka commended the United Arab Emirates’ strategies in education, health care and housing. It welcomed initiatives to empower women and promote the rights of migrant workers. It made a recommendation. 98. Sudan valued the United Arab Emirates’ establishment of institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights, including the Office for the Respect of the Law and the High Committee for the Protection of Children, along with efforts in promoting women’s rights and gender equality. It made recommendations. 99. Sweden was concerned by restrictive actions regarding freedom of expression, which the Government had restricted on the Internet. It was also concerned by reports of employer and sponsor abuse of migrant and domestic workers rights. It made recommendations. 100. Switzerland noted the United Arab Emirates’ ratification of CAT, but expressed regret at its failure to ratify other international human rights instruments. It noted that the death penalty was only rarely applied in the United Arab Emirates. It made recommendations. 101. Thailand applauded the United Arab Emirates for acceding to various conventions, improving its domestic legislative framework and building the human rights capacity of stakeholders. It acknowledged efforts to combat trafficking in persons and appreciated steps taken to improve the working conditions of migrant workers. It made recommendations. 102. Togo noted the United Arab Emirates’ accession to CAT, the CRPD and the Palermo Protocol and encouraged accession to OP-CRC. It commended the United Arab Emirates for its promotion of women’s rights. Togo made recommendations. 103. Tunisia noted the constitutional amendment of 2009, the establishment of institutions tasked with human rights issues and the ratification of CRPD and CAT. It noted efforts to promote gender equality and human rights education, and to improve living and housing conditions. It encouraged the ratification of remaining core human rights instruments. It made recommendations. 104. Regarding comments on the Cyber Crime Law, the head of the United Arab Emirates delegation explained that the aim of Law No. 5 (2012) was to address many aspects of the use or misuse of the Internet, providing sanctions for the use of the Internet for trafficking crimes, money laundering, the promotion of racial hatred, terrorism, pornography and identity theft, among others. At the same time, the law addresses matters of public order and national security, including matters such as organizing demonstrations without a licence, calling for the overthrow of the Government or insulting the United Arab Emirates rulers. Although these were sensitive matters which could be the subject of an open debate, particularly regarding fears concerning restrictions on freedom of speech, the content of this law should not be misunderstood or distorted to call into question the country’s commitment to the rule of law and respect for human rights and freedoms. 105. Regarding comments related to the strengthening of the human rights culture, including through human rights training, the delegation confirmed that it was continuing efforts in this direction. Regarding questions on labour issues, the United Arab Emirates noted that the domestic workers’ law was in the final stages of the legislative process. Once adopted, this law would close an important gap. More generally, over the past four years, the United Arab Emirates had taken increased efforts to address labour protection issues but realized this would be a dynamic process and would require further work in the future. 106. On human trafficking and domestic violence, the delegation referred to the existence of shelters, which provided a safe place for victims and were accessible through a 24-hour hotline. They also provided case management and support planning, as well as counselling and legal services. Shelters worked in liaison with the United Nations High Commission for Refugees and the International Maritime Organization referral mechanisms and also pursued cooperation with relevant nongovernmental organizations to support victims. 107. Turkey commended the United Arab Emirates for its progress in all areas of human rights, in particular its national policies to empower women, promote migrant workers’ rights and combat human trafficking. It recognized that the United Arab Emirates was pursuing a goodwill strategy to enhance the rights and conditions of all workers and to raise their awareness thereof. It made recommendations. 108. Turkmenistan appreciated the United Arab Emirates’ accession to CAT, CRPD and the Palermo Protocol. It was pleased to note that a number of Special Procedures had visited the United Arab Emirates at the invitation of its Government. It made recommendations. 109. Germany enquired about the status concerning accession to OP-CRC-SC and OP-CRC-AC and regarding the establishment of an independent human rights institution. It enquired whether the legislation to combat information technology crimes contained safeguards against undue infringement of freedom of expression. It welcomed steps to strengthen the status of women. Germany made recommendations. 110. The United States of America commended the United Arab Emirates on enhancing migrant worker protection, including procedures to identify victims of forced labour, and its Virtual Global Task Force to protect against online abuse and sexual exploitation. However, it remained concerned that political activists had been arrested and held without charge. It made recommendations. 111. Uruguay highlighted progress made through the incorporation of human rights issues in governmental departments. It noted that certain legal provisions were detrimental to the rights of women. It noted also the complicated situation of human rights defenders in the country. It made recommendations. 112. Uzbekistan welcomed United Arab Emirates’ accession to CAT and consideration of signing OP-CRC-SC and OP-CRC-AC. It took a positive view of efforts in combating human trafficking, in particular accession of the country to the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children. In this regard Uzbekistan asked the United Arab Emirates about its plans to promote further international cooperation. 113. Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) noted the significant increase in the budget allocation for health and the implementation of strategic programmes to combat chronic disease. It highlighted the considerable reduction in infant mortality. It asked what efforts were being made regarding the protection of persons with HIV/AIDS. It made a recommendation. 114. Viet Nam commended the United Arab Emirates’ commitment to promoting and protecting human rights, its establishment of the Committee to combat human trafficking and interrelated strategies to promote women’s and children’s rights. It applauded the United Arab Emirates’ high ranking in the human rights-related lists and its international cooperation. It made a recommendation. 115. Algeria welcomed the ratification of CAT and CRPD and progress towards accession to OP-CRC-SC/AC, as well as the study to establish an NHRI. It noted policies to promote economic, social and cultural rights, especially regarding foreign workers and advancement of women. It made recommendations. 116. Angola noted with satisfaction the United Arab Emirates’ commitment to promoting and protecting women’s rights, reflected by the increase in women occupying positions within ministerial, diplomatic and judicial institutions, and in the police and armed forces. It commended the United Arab Emirates’ accession to CAT and CRPD. It made a recommendation. 117. Argentina applauded the establishment of the Centre for Child Protection within the Ministry of the Interior, the creation of the Committee to combat the crime of trafficking in persons, and the ratification of CAT. It made recommendations. 118. Liechtenstein was concerned that corporal punishment of children was lawful within the family and as a sentence for crime. It made recommendations. 119. Afghanistan welcomed the United Arab Emirates’ policies and strategies promoting and protecting rights and freedoms, as well as its accession to major international instruments. It commended the United Arab Emirates for its contribution to developing countries. It made recommendations. 120. The Republic of Korea welcomed the “Emirates Vision 2021” strategy. It noted the United Arab Emirates’ efforts to establish a national human rights institution and welcomed its ratification of CAT and CRPD. It made recommendations. 121. The head of the United Arab Emirates delegation assured that the United Arab Emirates would closely study the comments and recommendations received during the review with a view to further improving its record. On questions related to HIV, the delegation referred to a decision taken by the Cabinet in 2010 to upgrade the national programme on combating HIV, which addressed various important issues in this area and aimed to improve the lives of those who suffer from this illness, enabling them to study and work, and to play a productive and positive role in society, including through social and financial support. 122. With regard to the legal system, the delegation conveyed its pride regarding international indicators which revealed that the transparency of its legal system enjoyed a high rank among the countries of the world. The delegation thanked the Chair and the Troika for their role. He noted that all institutions and civil society had benefited from the UPR process, for which they had prepared over a period of two years through an inclusive dialogue. In the process, the United Arab Emirates had built capacity, a very important thing in itself. Over 130 civil society organizations had participated in this process. 123. The delegation reiterated that the United Arab Emirates would continue to address labour issues and it would exchange experience and expertise with friends and partners to further improve its record. Substantial progress had already been made since 2008. The United Arab Emirates had carefully listened to observations made at the 2008 review, and it was again doing so now.  124. On the status of women, the delegation highlighted the United Arab Emirates’ positive record, which was outstanding among countries in the region, at a time which saw the reversal and regression in the rights of women in many countries of the Arab region, even in countries that had undergone revolutions. 125. The United Arab Emirates also emphasized its progressive record on minority rights, religious tolerance and harmony between the different communities, which was the essence of the society that the United Arab Emirates aspired to maintain. In this spirit, the United Arab Emirates was also gradually developing the political participation process, as initiated in 2006. The delegation stated that the United Arab Emirates would continue to fight against extremist agendas, which attempted to undermine this record with a regressive and conservative approach. 126. The delegation also acknowledged the existence of some boundaries, derived from the country’s religious and cultural framework, which required all laws to be in line with the foundations of Arab and Muslim society and did not allow different cultures to be superimposed on the United Arab Emirates society. 127. The delegation concluded that the United Arab Emirates’ record, while not being perfect, was a strong and positive one, which was at the forefront in the region and which the United Arab Emirates was keen to defend.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**  ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 128. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue will be examined by the United Arab Emirates, which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the 23rd session of the Human Rights Council in June 2013. 128.1. Ratify international human rights instruments to which the country is not yet a party (Burkina Faso); Proceed with the process of ratification of international human rights instruments to which the country is not yet a party (Côte d’Ivoire); Consider ratifying the international instruments in the area of human rights (Montenegro); 128.2. Consider ratifying the ICCPR (Armenia); 128.3. Ratify ICCPR (Togo); Ratify ICCPR (France); Ratify ICCPR (Austria); Accede to ICCPR (Estonia); 128.4. Take into serious consideration the ratification of other core human rights instruments, especially ICCPR and ICESCR (Republic of Korea); Give favourable consideration to the possibility of acceding to ICESCR and ICCPR (Belarus); 128.5. Ratify ICCPR and ICESCR (Brazil); Ratify ICCPR and ICESCR (Switzerland); Ratify ICCPR and ICESCR (Guatemala); Ratify ICCPR and ICESCR (Spain); 128.6. Ratify ICESCR and ICCPR at the earliest possible date (Japan); 128.7. Accede to the ICCPR and its Optional Protocols, and ICESCR, and adopt measures to promote awareness of the rights contained in these instruments (Australia); 128.8. Ratify ICCPR, including its second protocol, and ICESCR (Portugal); 128.9. Ratify the two international Covenants and other core international human rights conventions (Italy); 128.10. Ratify all the main international human rights instruments, especially ICCPR and ICESCR (Finland); 128.11. Become a party to the main international human rights treaties and therefore ratify ICCPR and ICESCR (Netherlands); 128.12. Consider acceding to the remaining core human rights instruments including ICCPR, ICESCR and ICMW (Kenya); 128.13. Ratify ICCPR and CAT (Chile); 128.14. Ratify ICMW (Guatemala); 128.15. Accede to ICMW and ILO Convention 189 (Philippines); 128.16. Consider ratifying ICMW (Indonesia); 128.17. Ratify OP-CAT (Switzerland); Ratify OP-CAT (Austria); Ratify OP-CAT (Spain); 128.18. Proceed swiftly with the ratification of OP-CAT (Estonia); 128.19. Consider acceding to OP-CAT (Costa Rica); Consider ratifying OP- CAT (Tunisia); 128.20. Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (France); 128.21. Continue efforts to ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Argentina); 128.22. Ratify the Optional Protocols to the CRC (India); 128.23. Speed up the ratification of the two Optional Protocols to the CRC (Tunisia); 128.24. Consider ratifying all three Optional Protocols to the CRC (Slovakia); 128.25. Take further efforts towards the accession of the Optional Protocol to the CRC on the involvement of children in armed conflict (Serbia); 128.26. Ratify the Rome Statute (France); Ratify the Rome Statute (Ecuador); Ratify the Rome Statute (Slovenia); Ratify the Rome Statute (Austria); 128.27. Ratify the Rome Statute of the ICC and bring its legislation in line with the obligations of this Statute (Costa Rica); 128.28. Ratify the Rome Statute of the ICC and accede to the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the ICC (Estonia); 128.29. Ratify the Rome Statute of the ICC in its 2010 version, including the amendments on the crime of aggression, and review its national legislation in order to ensure full alignment with the Statute (Liechtenstein); 128.30. Ratify the Rome Statute of the ICC and fully align its legislation with all obligations under the Rome Statute, including incorporating the Rome Statute definition of crimes and general principles, as well as adopting provisions enabling  cooperation with the Court (Latvia); 128.31. Ratify the Rome Statute of the ICC and accede to the Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of the ICC (Uruguay); (Slovakia); 128.32. Ratify the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons (Ecuador); 128.33. Withdraw the reservations to CEDAW, in particular articles 2(f), 9 and 15 paragraph 2 (Slovenia); 128.34. Withdraw the reservation to article 2 and 16 of CEDAW (Finland); 128.35. Withdraw its reservation to article 16 of CEDAW and introduce legislative reforms to give women equal rights in marriage, divorce, property relations, child custody and inheritance (Uruguay); 128.36 Withdraw reservations to CAT (Austria); 128.37. Withdraw the unilateral declaration which seriously limits the scope of the definition of torture under CAT (Netherlands); 128.38. Withdraw the declaration made upon accession, regarding article 1 of CAT (Denmark); 128.39. Withdraw its reservations and declaration to CAT (Switzerland); 128.40. Consider withdrawing the reservations made to the CRC (Tunisia); 128.41. Create an NHRI in conformity with the Paris Principles (Republic of Korea); Put in place an NHRI in accordance with the Paris Principles (Burkina Faso); Establish an independent NHRI with a solid mandate and in accordance with the Paris Principles (Côte d’Ivoire); Pursue the steps aimed at creating an NHRI (Algeria); Conclude the work initiated towards establishing an NHRI (Maldives); 128.42. Establish an NHRI, in accordance with the United Arab Emirates’ engagement in the first cycle of the UPR (Togo); 128.43. Further consider establishing an independent NHRI in accordance with the Paris Principles (Montenegro); 128.44. Continue consideration of the establishment of an NHRI to contribute to awareness-raising and the spread of a human rights culture in the United Arab Emirates society (Bahrain); 128.45. Continue its positive approach towards the establishment of an NHRI in accordance with the Paris Principles (Malaysia); 128.46. Accelerate the completion of the study on the possibility of establishing an NHRI in accordance with Paris Principles (Tunisia) 128.47. Clarify the mandate and scope of its proposed NHRI as per the Paris Principles (Norway); 128.48. Continue to make efforts to establish the Ombudsman in compliance with the Paris Principles (Nicaragua); 128.49. Strengthen the role of its national mechanisms and institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights in the country (Bhutan); 128.50. Give continuity to strengthening national human rights mechanisms (Nepal); 128.51. Continue strengthening the protection of all foreign labourers through the adoption of legislation which complies with international human rights standards (Brazil); 128.52. Continue taking the necessary measures at the legislative and procedural level to provide full protection for migrant workers in the United Arab Emirates (Egypt); 128.53. Continue efforts to safeguard the dignity and protect the interests of migrant workers, including through requisite institutional and legislative measures (Nepal); 128.54. Continue to strengthen labour laws by implementing the provisions of the June 2011 ILO treaty that extends key labour protections to domestic workers (Canada); 128.55. Continue its efforts in favour of the rights of foreign workers, in particular, by ensuring that employers properly comply with national legislation and by continuing its cooperation with countries of origin of these foreign workers (France); 128.56. Continue the efforts aiming at the reinforcement of the protection of the rights of foreign workers (Senegal); 128.57. Take further measures and initiatives to implement the Strategy for the Protection of Labours (Bangladesh); 128.58. Continue with efforts to provide more protection to domestic workers and improve their living conditions (Ethiopia); 128.59. Bolster its practical capacity to oversee the working and living conditions of foreign workers (Cyprus); 128.60. Write and publish an action plan with clear milestones and timelines to ensure swift and effective implementation of legislation protecting the living and working conditions of foreign workers (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 128.61. Continue the positive developments in the protection of foreign workers (Indonesia); 128.62. Strongly enforce labour laws protecting employees’ rights so as to improve the living and working conditions of migrant workers, including through implementation by the Ministry of Labour of the provision for a minimum wage for all workers, as provided for by law (Ireland); 128.63. Implement legislation to regulate the living and working conditions of domestic workers and ensure that it is compatible with the standards of the ILO Convention No. 189 (Norway); 128.64. Enhance ongoing efforts to strengthen the protection of foreign workers, so as to ensure the continuous improvement of working and housing conditions while continuously monitoring labour law violations (Pakistan); 128.65. Take further steps to ensure the economic rights of migrant workers and domestic workers by implementing minimum wages and regulated working hours for all work categories (Sweden); 128.66. Continue making efforts to ensure that employers and sponsors fully respect the social and cultural rights of migrant workers and domestic workers, their right to housing and an adequate standard of living, and their right to education and training (Sweden); 128.67. Ensure full implementation of a strategy on the promotion of workers’ rights and a plan of action to guarantee fair and equal wages (Thailand); 128.68. Set up appropriate follow-up mechanisms in the area of the rights of workers (Thailand) 128.69. Continue its efforts in pursuing a good-willed strategy to enhance the rights and conditions of workers including the foreign workers, hand in hand with an awareness-raising campaign for migrant workers (Turkey); 128.70. Address discrimination against non-citizens, particularly concerning domestic workers, granting them equal protection and rights as to its own citizens (Slovakia); 128.71. Adopt and implement specific legislation on racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, with particular emphasis on the protection of migrant workers and their families (Mexico); 128.72. Consider the adoption of specific legislation on racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance (Armenia); 128.73. Solve the situation of statelessness of the different populations living in the territory by recognizing their ties and long stay in the country (Mexico); 128.74. Continue its efforts to promote gender equality and eliminate discrimination against women and girls (Singapore); 128.75. Accelerate its efforts in women’s empowerment and gender equality, including through the updated National Strategy for the Advancement of Women in the United Arab Emirates, 2013-2017 (Indonesia); 128.76. Steadily implement the National Strategy for the Advancement of Women (Japan); 128.77. Work on renewing the National Strategy to empower women by integrating additional programmes and projects to strengthen the role of women as a main partner in the development process (Egypt); 128.78. Continue enhancing its efforts on strengthening women’s rights through its National Strategy for the Advancement of Women 2013-2017 (Malaysia); 128.79. Continue putting forward effective measures for the protection and promotion of the rights of women in the country (Azerbaijan); 128.80. Take efforts in the area of promotion and protection of women’s rights so as to ensure that women are fully integrated into the development dynamics of the country (Burkina Faso); 128.81. Ensure that women have full access to justice, obtain equal legal capacity and are treated equally in courts (Liechtenstein); 128.82. Reform the legislation with a view to providing women with equal rights in marriage, divorce, property relations, the custody of children and inheritance (Liechtenstein); 128.83. Continue with the necessary legislations to ensure the promotion and protection of the rights of women and their role in society, including the enhancement of their participation in the State institutions, and achieve full equality in employment opportunities (Egypt); 128.84. Modify the family law by eliminating discrimination between men and women, and fight effectively domestic violence (Togo); 128.85. Fully incorporate in the Constitution or other national legislation the principle of equality between men and women (Chile); 128.86. Undertake efforts to integrate in the Constitution, or other national legislation, the principle of equality between men and women and related regulations (Ecuador); 128.87. Continue to introduce amendments to its national family law to ensure equal status and rights for women, in all matters (Canada); 128.88. Continue to pay attention to promoting gender equality and eliminating discrimination against women (Sudan); 128.89. Continue to work towards increasing the representation of women in leading and decision-making positions (Sudan); 128.90. Enshrine full equality between women and men in the Constitution and enact specific legislation to protect women, including foreign domestic workers from sexual and domestic violence (Austria); 128.91. Continue its efforts to correct the discriminatory practices and institutions against women throughout society, and take active measures to reduce social elements that could contribute to acquiescence or passivity with regard to domestic violence as demonstrated in its UPR report (Republic of Korea); 128.92. Introduce legislation to prohibit the rights of men to physically punish their wives (Denmark); 128.93. Ensure enhancement of the status of women in the Emirates’ society by eliminating all forms of discrimination which may persist with regard to arrangements of divorce and the ways in which domestic violence is dealt with (France); 128.94. Continue to enact legislations and strengthen policies which are necessary to empower women and strengthen their roles in society (India); 128.95. Continue strengthening protective measures and legal rights for women and children, including by giving women equal status to men in matters of divorce, inheritance and child custody (Norway); 128.96. Continue its efforts in the field of women participation in high level positions of decision-making and in all areas of society (Angola); 128.97. Take the necessary measures to harmonize traditional and statutory regulations, in order to further eliminate the exceptions to the principle of non-discrimination on the grounds of sex, and strengthen the protection of women, especially of female domestic workers (Spain); 128.98. Further improve her policies and follow-up measures to foster justice, equality, tolerance as well as the full guarantee of human rights for the vulnerable groups, in particular women and foreign workers (Viet Nam); 128.99. Pay special attention to the health needs of women in rural areas (Libya); 128.100. Continue its ongoing efforts to further increase the attendance of girls in secondary and higher education and the participation of women in professional and political spheres (Turkey); 128.101. Take decisive action to promote the rights of female citizens in order to achieve legal equality between men and women in terms of marriage, divorce, inheritance and child custody (Germany); 128.102. Amend the Penal Code in order to repeal the right of a husband to punish his wife and the right of parents or custodians to punish their minor children by means of physical violence or coercion (Germany); 128.103. Respect the right to freedom of expression and association, and make the minimum use of criminal proceedings against persons availing themselves of those rights (Belgium); 128.104. Ensure the full protection of the rights to freedom of expression, association, assembly, religion and belief by all United Arab Emirates residents (Austria); 128.105. Take steps to protect human rights defenders, journalists and religious minorities from discrimination, harassment or intimidation, including the arbitrary deprivation of nationality (Austria); 128.106. Repeal the 1980 Law on publications and amend other relevant legislation to ensure it is aligned with international human rights law on the freedom of expression (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 128.107. Continue to take steps to uphold freedom of expression by reviewing restrictive articles of its recent Cyber Crime law and consider updating the 1980 Media Law, ensuring that new legislation be aligned with article 19 of the ICCPR (Canada); 128.108. Conduct a public consultation on the Cybercrime law to ensure that the law does not prevent free speech and expression, including religious expression (United States of America); 128.109. Further develop legislation and practices in the media sector to strengthen the right to freedom of expression (Turkmenistan); 128.110. Bring criminal legislation, in particular Articles 8 and 176 of the Criminal Code, in conformity with international standards governing freedom of expression (Belgium); 128.111. Enhance implementation of the constitutional provisions on freedom of expression (Italy); 128.112. Ensure legislation in the area of freedom of expression is in line with international standards, including by amending the Cyber Crime law and repealing the November 2012 Federal Legal Decree No. 5 on Cyber Crime (Ireland); 128.113. Encourage freedom of expression and the press, including by amending the penal code to remove all criminal penalties for alleged libel offences (Norway); 128.114. Take immediate steps to ensure that the national regulations relating to the Internet guarantee freedom of expression (Sweden); 128.115. Release from custody any individual detained solely on the basis of peaceful expression of political views (Norway); 128.116. Adjust existing laws governing non-governmental organizations to adapt them to international human rights laws and standards (Uruguay); 128.117. Consider the adoption of proper reforms in order to improve the protection of freedom for human rights defenders to carry on their initiatives (Italy); 128.118. Continue its efforts to develop a modern legal framework for media that take into consideration new social, cultural and political developments while preserving the interests of the State and society (Kuwait); 128.119. Allow individuals the right to associate freely and provide expeditious due process for all those accused of crimes (United States of America); 128.120. Establish a moratorium on the death penalty, as a first step towards complete abolition of this practice and accession to the Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR (Australia); 128.121. Establish a moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing death penalty entirely, especially with regard to juvenile offenders (Slovakia); 128.122. Establish immediately a moratorium on the death penalty as the first step toward its abolition (Switzerland); 128.123. Consider establishing a moratorium on executions of the death penalty with the aim of abolishing it (Montenegro); Consider establishing a moratorium on executions of the death penalty with the aim of abolishing it (Chile); 128.124. Guarantee that de facto moratorium on executions will continue and consider abolishing the death penalty (France); 128.125. Abolish the death penalty and ensure that fair trial guarantees are properly implemented (Austria); 128.126. Abolish the death penalty and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Spain); 128.127. To elaborate the possibility to eliminate corporal punishment and the death penalty (Estonia); Repeal corporal punishment and the death penalty from its penal system (Argentina); 128.128. In the application of the death penalty, act in accordance with the CRC (article 37), to which the United Arab Emirates is a party (Belgium); 128.129. Respect the minimum standards for the death penalty (Belgium); 128.130. Reduce the number of crimes where the death penalty can be imposed (Hungary); 128.131. Promptly and impartially investigate all allegations of torture, and prosecute those responsible for ordering, carrying out or acquiescing in torture or ill-treatment (Denmark); 128.132. Continue intensifying efforts to combat all cases of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, and launch the National Verification Mechanism that allows to bring complaints before the judiciary (Spain); 128.133. Take legislative measures to explicitly ban corporal punishment in all settings, including the home and penal institutions, set up effective complaints mechanisms and provide training in the identification, reporting and management of cases of ill-treatment to teachers, law enforcement and health professionals (Liechtenstein); 128.134. Implement further measures to support victims of domestic violence (Australia); 128.135. Protect the human rights of all individuals, including LGBT individuals, and take appropriate steps to help ensure that protection is provided to the victim and perpetrators are identified and prosecuted (United States of America); 128.136. Repeal the criminalization of sexual relations between persons of the same sex (Argentina); 128.137. Continue its efforts to increase international cooperation in order to benefit from other experiences and best practices in the field of combating trafficking in persons (State of Palestine); 128.138. Consider amending Law No. 51 (2006) on combatting the crime of human trafficking (Mauritania); 128.139. Step up efforts in amending some provisions of Federal Law 51 of 2006 on combating human trafficking to better align it with the Palermo Protocol (Philippines); 128.140. Continue the good work in addressing the phenomenon of human trafficking (Greece); 128.141. Further step up its national and international efforts to prevent and eradicate human trafficking, including effective protection for the victims of trafficking (Belarus); 128.142. Fully implement the recently adopted legislation and strategy on combating trafficking in persons to ensure effective provision of assistance, rehabilitation and reintegration for victims of trafficking, particularly women and children, and the bringing of perpetrators to justice (Thailand); 128.143. Continue to strengthen its national institutions to combat human trafficking (Singapore); 128.144. Further continue the existing cooperation with United Nations human rights mechanisms (Azerbaijan); continue intensifying its cooperation with the UN human rights mechanisms (State of Palestine); 128.145. Strengthen its cooperation with the UN human rights mechanisms, in particular the special procedures mandate holders (Côte d’Ivoire); 128.146. Cooperate with the Special Procedures and accept requests currently pending by the Special Rapporteurs to carry out country visits (Belgium); 128.147. Extend an open-ended invitation to all Special Procedures of the Human Rights Council (Guatemala); Extend an open invitation to special procedures (Netherlands); 128.148. Consider extending a standing invitation to all the special procedures of the Human Rights Council (Latvia); 128.149. Extend an open invitation to the Special Rapporteur on Torture to visit the country (Costa Rica); 128.150. Consider positively inviting the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights while countering terrorism (Mexico); 128.151. Enhance technical cooperation with OHCHR (Morocco); Strengthens technical cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in various relevant fields (State of Palestine); 128.152. Organise regional and international conferences in cooperation with international and regional human rights organisations in order to exchange views, best practices and experiences in strengthening a human rights culture (Morocco); 128.153. Continue to support the UN human rights funds (Jordan); 128.154. Make additional efforts to improve reporting to the Human Rights Treaty Bodies under the treaties to which the United Arab Emirates are party (Algeria); 128.155. Achieve exemplary harmony by aligning national legislations with international treaties and protocols that it has ratified (Bahrain); 128.156. Continue its ongoing review of national laws to ensure that they are in line with its international human rights law obligations (Turkmenistan); 128.157. Cooperate with the United Nations and other international and regional mechanisms in order to ensure that the legal and administrative measures taken to combat terrorism respect the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (Mexico); 128.158. Further pursue its efforts to promote sustainable economic and social development and further strengthen social security so that its people can enjoy all human rights (China); 128.159. Pursue initiatives aimed at reinforcing the provision of economic, social and cultural rights with a view to promoting sustainable development and transition to a green economy (Maldives); 128.160. Continue to place importance on secure economic development, including through infrastructure development in rural areas, in order to ensure that people living in these areas fully enjoy their economic and social rights (Sri Lanka); 128.161. Continue its good momentum in its initiative to improve the quality of human life through its strive towards a green economy (Brunei Darussalam); 128.162. Continue the implementation of measures adopted in the field of development and continue to place particular importance on strengthening the health care system in the country (Cuba); 128.163. Continue to intensify its efforts to consolidate the progress achieved in the area of health (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 128.164. Strengthen the efforts of the Supreme Council for Mothers and Children and provide sufficient resources in order to coordinate the State policy in the area of the promotion of children’s rights (Djibouti); 128.165. Continue efforts towards achieving a system that provides better protection for children, as well as the promotion and protection of the rights of women (Lebanon); 128.166. Adopt the Children’s Rights Bill (Serbia); 128.167. Finalise the adoption of the law on the protection of the rights of the child, which has been recently announced (Djibouti); 128.168. Continue to support initiatives, programmes and funds aiming at supporting youth projects in order to enhance the enjoyment of economic rights and provide job opportunities (Afghanistan); 128.169. Further strengthen its role as an international centre for higher education (Azerbaijan); 128.170. Continue its efforts in the area of the right to education, and in allocating the necessary resources to promote this right and improve the quality of education (Qatar); 128.171. Consider the adoption of a national strategy to enhance the promotion and protection of human rights of the elderly (Iraq); 128.172. Work towards supporting civil society efforts in promoting human rights by allocating the necessary resources required to achieve its activities in disseminating awareness of human rights principles (Oman); 128.173. Continue implementing the political empowerment programme launched in 2006 in promoting awareness and education in human rights, and ensure greater participation in accordance with best practices and standards in this field (Libya); 128.174. Launch media programmes to raise awareness on human rights (Oman); 128.175. Continue to intensify cooperation with civil society organisations in order to debate on human rights issues and coordinate their follow-up and implementation on the ground (Pakistan); 128.176. Formulate human rights training programmes to spread awareness among the civil service, particularly law enforcement officials and members of the judiciary (Qatar); 128.177. Continue with the legal and legislative reforms at the national level to strengthen and protect human rights in accordance with international standards and in harmony with the cultural values of the people of the United Arab Emirates (Saudi Arabia); 128.178. Continue efforts to spread the culture of human rights through educational curriculums and the media (Saudi Arabia); 128.179. Continue making contribution by providing support to developing countries in order to improve the enjoyment of human rights in these countries (Afghanistan); 128.180. Continue its efforts to respond positively to requests to restore stolen assets to their rightful owners and to cooperate in the extradition of those involved in human rights violations and corruption cases (Tunisia); 129. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English only]   Composition of the delegation The delegation of the United Arab Emirates was headed by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, HE Dr Anwar Mohammad Gargash and composed of the following members: • H.E. Dr. Abdulrahim Yousif ALAWADI, Assistant Foreign Minister for Legal Affairs; • H.E. Mr. Obaid Salem AL ZAABI, Ambassador / Permanent Representative, UAE Mission – Geneva; • H.E. Sheikh Sultan Bin Hamdan AL NAHYAN, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • H.E. Dr. Saeed Mohamed Abdulla ALGHUFLI, Asst. Secretary General, Ministry of Federal National Council Affairs; • H.E. Dr. Mahmoud Mohamed Abdulla FIKRI, Asst. Under Secretary, Ministry of Health; • H.E. Mr. Hussain Saeed Abdulla Ahmad ALSHAIKH, Asst. Under Sec., Ministry of Social Affairs; • H.E. Mr. Maher Hamad Ali Obaid ALOBAD, Undersecretary assistant of InspectionAffairs, Ministry of Labor; • H.E. Mr. Sultan Majed AL ALI, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • H.E. Mr. Adel Issa AL MAHRI, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • H.E. Mr. Ali Matar AL MANA’EE, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • H.E. Mr. Abdulrahman Ali ALSHAMSI, Secretariat of the Federal National Council; • H.E. Mr. Rashed Saeed AL AMERI, Ministry of Presidential Affairs; • H.E. Shaikha Khawla Ebrahim Ahmed AL MUALLA, Ministry of Education; • H.E. Mr. Ahmed Humaid ALMARZROUEI, Red Crescent Authority; • H.E. Mr. Ahmed Mohamed Nekhaira Alsaab ALMUHARRAMI, Ministry of Interior; • Mr. Abdalla Ali Saeed Binsaho ALSUWAIDI, Ministry of Interior; • Mr. Hassan Ali MIRZA ABDULRAHMAN, Ministry of Interior; • H.E. Mrs. Noura Khalifa AL SUWAIDI, General Women's Union; • H.E. Mr. Ebrahim Obaid Ali AL-ALI, Head of Appeal Court - Ministry of Justice; • H.E.Mr. Mohamed Abdalla ALMUR, Dubai Police Headquarters; • H.E. Mrs. Afra Rashed Eid ALBASTI, Women and Child Foundation of Dubai, • H.E. Mrs. Sara Ibrahim Abdulaziz SHOHAIL, Shelters; • Mrs. Hassa Eissa ABU HUMAID, Ministry of Cabinet Affairs; • Mr. Omar Ali Saeed Bin Maleh AL SHAMSI, Community Development Authority of Dubai; • Dr. Mohammed Ebrahim ALMANSOORI, Supreme Council for Childhood and Motherhood; • Mrs. Amna Ali Hamad AL MUHAIRY, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Mubarak Mohamed ALHAMMADI, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Eiman Khamis Ateeq Bedyo ALRAISI, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Nabila ALSHAMSI, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mrs. Nahida NAKAD, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Philip V. Anthony  DUFTY, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mrs. Garbriella IANCU Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Aisha AL SUWAIDI, Ministry of Labour; • Dr. Rashed Ali Mohammed Rashed ALNUAIMI, Ministry of Interior; • Mr. Abdulrahman Jasem Salem Rubayea ALDHAHERI, Ministry of Interior; • Mr. Salah Obaid AL SALAMI, Ministry of Interior; • Mrs. Alya Hassan Yahya Ahmed ALYASSI, National Media Council; • Mr. Ali Sultan ALHADDAD, Public Prosecution of Dubai; • Mr. Marwan Sultan Ali Sultan ALHADDAD, National Program; • Mr. Mohamed Salim Mohamed Aldarsi AL KAABI, Emirates Association for Human Rights; • Mrs. Rawdha Jumaa Obaid Kaddas AL REMEITHI, Shelters; • Ms. Suha Ibrahim Abdulla AL MUBARAK, Shelters.     