  United Nations  A/HRC/28/11    General Assembly  Distr.: General 5 December 2014  Original: English  Human Rights Council Twenty-eighth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   Angola Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–133 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–20 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  21–133 5  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  134–136 13  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  28   Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its twentieth session from 27 October to 7 November 2014. The review of Angola was held at the 8th meeting on 30 October 2014. The delegation of Angola was headed by Rui Jorge Carneiro Mangueira. At its 14th meeting, held on 4 November 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on Angola. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Angola: Chile, the Congo and France. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Angola: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/AGO/1);  (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/AGO/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/AGO/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, the Czech Republic, Germany, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America was transmitted to Angola through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR).  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation stated that the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms was a permanent feature of Government policy, internally and externally. In 2007, Angola had been elected to the Human Rights Council and had served two consecutive terms, from 2007 to 2013. Angola had had the privilege of participating in the negotiations and approval of the institution-building package. Angola considered the universal periodic review mechanism as an excellent opportunity to assess the performance of Governments on human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as to exchange experiences, best practices and challenges, based on universally accepted standards.  6. Angola had been engaged in a long period of armed conflict, the consequences of which were still being felt in various fields. However, the past 12 years of effective peace had allowed the realization of legislative elections in 2008 and general elections in 2012, which had taken place peacefully and were considered free and fair by the international community. 7. The legal framework for human rights was characterized by a set of legal instruments, particularly the Constitution of the Republic of Angola, which enshrined international law, thus demonstrating the particular interest Angola attached to the human rights and fundamental freedoms enshrined in key international instruments.  8. During its first universal periodic review, Angola had accepted 166 recommendations. The status of implementation of those recommendations was contained in the national report that had been submitted to the Human Rights Council. The report had been prepared by the intersectoral commission for human rights reporting, with the active participation of Angolan civil society organizations. 9. The delegation stated that in 2010, the Committee on the Rights of the Child had examined the second to fourth consolidated periodic reports of Angola on the implementation of the Convention. The next consolidated report would be submitted in October 2015. In February 2013, the Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) had considered the country’s sixth periodic report. In March 2013, the Human Rights Committee had considered the initial report on the implementation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). In April 2013, the then United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights had visited Angola. While the High Commissioner had noted challenges, she also acknowledged the progress that had been made.  10. The delegation stated that in 2010, the Government had taken concrete steps to strengthen the national system of human rights protection with the merger of the then Ministry of Justice and the Office of the Secretary of State for Human Rights, resulting in the establishment of the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights.  11. The National Assembly had approved for discussion the draft law on the organization and functioning of the courts, which provided for the establishment of 60 district courts and 5 courts of appeal, making access to justice faster, more accessible and less costly.  12. The efforts to achieve the main objectives of the Millennium Development Goals had halved the extreme poverty rates. The Government had established the National Plan of Development for 2013–2017, creating conditions to enable the growth of the economy and for the better distribution of wealth. 13. The preliminary results of the census held in May indicated that the country had 24,383,301 inhabitants, of whom 52 per cent were female. Women were by far the majority in the population. However, their representation corresponded to 21 per cent in government jobs, 36 per cent in parliament, 30 per cent in the judicial system and 50 per cent in diplomacy.  14. The Government was implementing the National Programme on Housing and Urban Development, with the main focus on building 35,000 houses and ensuring the right to adequate housing. Evictions occurred only by court order and people were resettled. About 20,000 homes built in the Province of Luanda (Zango project) had been given free of charge to citizens who had been evicted. Also, efforts had been made to improve the distribution of energy and water, and the delegation mentioned the three main programmes in that regard.  15. In response to the advance questions, the delegation stated that Angola was examining the compatibility of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court with its own legal system. The Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT) and the Optional Protocol thereto (OP-CAT), together with other instruments, had been signed in 2013, and was going through the process of ratification. 16. The Government had invited the Special Rapporteur on adequate housing as a component of the right to an adequate standard of living, and on the right to non-discrimination in this context, the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants and the Special Rapporteur on freedom of peaceful assembly and of association to visit Angola. However, the visits did not take place because of the timing, but there was political will to have those visits and they may occur next year. The delegation emphasized that freedom of expression was a fundamental right enshrined in article 40 of the Constitution in conjunction with Law No. 7/06 of 15 May (Press Law), as well as other international legal instruments ratified by Angola, including ICCPR (art. 19) and the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, provided such expression did not violate the respect for a citizen’s honour, good name, reputation, image and private life. The delegation explained that the national service for criminal investigation and instruction, the Attorney General and the courts had standing to proceed with alleged violations only if the victim considered that his honour had been offended and proceeded to lodge a formal complaint. If the victim decided to drop the case, for any reason, including agreement with the defendant, the case was closed. 17. Angola was a member of the United Nations and a party to the African Union Convention on Preventing and Combating Corruption. It was also a founding member of the Kimberley Process on the buying and selling of diamonds. A technical team comprising members drawn from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Geology and Mines and the Ministry of Petroleum was considering the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative.  18. A comprehensive programme of reform in the health-care sector had been carried out, including rehabilitation of the health-care infrastructure. There was also the expansion of the municipal health-care network and the creation of new specialized reference services. Angola continued to show improvement in the areas of pregnancy health care, the prevention of diseases through vaccination, and the reduction or stabilization of the incidence and mortality of endemic diseases, in particular HIV/AIDS. The health indicators showed remarkable progress in the areas of maternal and infant mortality.  19. Through Cabinet Presidential Decree No. 52/12 of 26 March 2012, Angola had established the Regulation for the National Commission on the Prevention and Audit of Maternal and Perinatal Deaths, and a project on strengthening municipal health services in order to enhance health care and management at the primary care level, with 267 Cuban technicians, and approved two projects on tuberculosis and malaria. The campaigns of provincial and national vaccination were frequent and had contributed to the reduction of preventable diseases.  20. The Constitution established several principles in safeguarding the rights of children. In 2008, the executive branch ratified 11 commitments to children and set out a plan of action for monitoring their implementation, which is assessed every two years at the National Children’s Forum.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 21. During the interactive dialogue, 101 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 22. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland welcomed the country’s recent openness to visits by human rights groups and urged Angola to ensure that democratic space remained open. 23. The United Republic of Tanzania acknowledged human rights achievements, which were made despite challenges in economic development, health and housing, and commended the adoption of the 2010 Constitution. 24. The United States of America expressed serious concerns over restrictions on freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and association, as well as over human rights violations committed by security forces. 25. Uruguay noted the priority given to international human rights instruments in the Constitution of Angola, and urged Angola to implement the recommendations received during the first UPR cycle.  26. Uzbekistan welcomed the adoption of the new Constitution, the reform of the justice system and the accession of Angola to a number of key international instruments. 27. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela commended the progress made by Angola on the implementation of recommendations from the first UPR cycle, ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) and reforms to basic education. 28. Viet Nam appreciated the adoption of the new Constitution, and noted the ongoing legal reforms and the ratification of and accession to international instruments since the previous UPR. 29. Zimbabwe noted the progress made in improving the human rights normative and institutional framework, and the readiness of Angola to cooperate with OHCHR and the human rights mechanisms.  30. Algeria encouraged Angola to proceed with the implementation of its National Development Plan for 2013–2017 and the National Strategy for Long-Term Development “Angola 2025”. 31. Argentina commended the efforts by Angola to guarantee the rights of elderly persons, and encouraged Angola to accelerate the harmonization of its domestic legislation with CEDAW. 32. Armenia commended the promotion by Angola of gender equality and children’s rights, but was concerned that several human rights instruments had not been ratified. 33. Australia expressed concern that measures to combat violence against women had not been implemented, and also expressed concern at reports of repressive measures and human rights abuses. 34. Azerbaijan noted improvement in the legal framework of Angola and the ratification of several international instruments. It noted the establishment of the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights. 35. Bangladesh commended the commitment of Angola to human rights, which it had demonstrated by taking measures such as the approval of the Constitution and the general elections. Bangladesh noted progress in primary health care. It also highlighted landmines awareness-raising as an issue. 36. Belarus noted the international obligations and agreements accepted by Angola and the improvements to its national system to protect human rights. 37. Belgium encouraged Angola to continue its follow-up of the recommendations made during the first UPR cycle. It was concerned by restrictions to freedom of expression. 38. Benin commended the adoption by Angola of its Constitution, and urged the international community to support Angola in promoting and protecting human rights. 39. The Plurinational State of Bolivia commended Angola on its ratification of human rights treaties and on its Integrated Municipal Programme for Rural Development and Fighting Poverty. 40. Botswana noted legislative and policy measures taken since the previous UPR on Angola, and the judicial reforms protecting women and children against trafficking and violence. It noted the measure to prevent corruption; it also noted challenges in the area of child abuse and neglect and the lack of specific legislation to protect children.  41. Brazil commended the progress made by Angola towards ratifying CAT and OP-CAT, but was concerned that some challenges still remained, particularly regarding persons with disabilities.  42. Burkina Faso encouraged Angola to coordinate human rights structures, provide human rights education, complete its birth registration campaign and eradicate accusations of witchcraft against children. 43. Burundi commended the country’s Commission on Justice and Law Reform, ratification of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and measures promoting gender equality and combating violence against women and children. 44. Cabo Verde noted the efforts made by Angola to improve human rights. It encouraged it to intensify its human rights activities and urged the international partners of Angola to provide all necessary assistance. 45. Canada enquired about progress made since the adoption of Law 25/11 on Domestic Violence. It was concerned about restrictions on minority religions, particularly Muslim communities, and press freedom. 46. The Central African Republic commended the ratification by Angola of several international instruments and its adoption of socioeconomic measures aimed at improving living conditions.  47. Chad noted the adoption of measures towards social protection, universal education, combating domestic violence and supporting elderly persons. It encouraged cooperation with the Human Rights Council and treaty bodies. 48. China commended the achievements in combating domestic violence, protecting children’s rights, reforming the education system and improving the health-care system. It also welcomed the ratification by Angola of CRPD and its signature of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD). 49. The Congo noted the adoption of the Constitution, accession to various international instruments, and prison reform. It encouraged Angola to create a national human rights institution in accordance with the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (Paris Principles). 50. Costa Rica recognized the signature by Angola of ICERD, CAT and OP-CAT, and domestic violence legislation. Extrajudicial executions, excessive use of force and intimidation were of concern. 51. Côte d’Ivoire welcomed the creation of the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights and accession to international instruments, including CRPD and the Optional Protocol thereto (OP-CRPD). 52. Cuba applauded steps to improve the poverty situation, the right to health, human rights education and sustainable development; it noted better child protection and development, and a reduction in illiteracy. 53. The Czech Republic warmly welcomed the delegation of Angola to the universal periodic review. 54. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea noted the reduction in poverty, the signature and ratification of international instruments and the implementation of national policies, which should continue. 55. The Democratic Republic of the Congo commended the commitment of Angola to human rights and the implementation of international instruments.  56. Denmark commended the progress made in protecting and promoting human rights, and highlighted the initiative launched for the universal ratification and implementation of CAT aimed at assisting Governments in overcoming obstacles to the ratification of the Convention. 57. Djibouti noted the policy of Angola to promote and protect human rights, in particular the rights of women and children. 58. The Dominican Republic commended achievements in education, particularly the reduced level of illiteracy, and efforts to prevent and control communicable diseases, especially endemic diseases. 59. Ecuador noted the focus in the new Constitution on promoting and protecting human rights, particularly to combat discrimination; and welcomed the country’s ratification of CRPD and OP-CRPD. 60. Egypt urged continued human rights progress, and noted the new Constitution, establishment of the National Children’s Council, ongoing judicial reform and consideration of a national human rights institution. 61. Equatorial Guinea applauded steps to combat poverty, improve women’s participation in decision-making processes and promote human rights education. 62. Eritrea noted with satisfaction the ongoing efforts in human rights and stressed points relating to, inter alia, (a) stepping up efforts to address issues of children’s rights, including by considering accession to instruments that Angola was not yet party to and (b) maximizing efforts to ensure social justice. 63. Estonia noted the adoption of the new Constitution and the creation of the Ombudsman’s institution. It welcomed the signing of several international instruments and stated that it looked forward to their ratification. 64. Ethiopia commended achievements in women’s and children’s rights, gender equality, education and housing, and in combating poverty, corruption, violence against children and harmful traditional practices. 65. France welcomed the presentation of the national report and the signing by Angola of several international human rights instruments in the past two years. 66. Gabon noted legislative and administrative measures against corruption and trafficking in persons; the visit of the former United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights; and the invitations extended to the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants and the Special Rapporteur on adequate housing. 67. Germany urged Angola to ratify and implement the human rights treaties it had signed, and expedite the implementation of outstanding recommendations. 68. Ghana noted the incorporation into the Constitution of international instruments; judicial reform; and the establishment of the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights and the Ombudsman’s Office. 69. Greece commended legislation on gender equality and women’s rights, and efforts to repatriate refugees, requesting information on the planned review and adoption of related legislation.  70. The Holy See acknowledged the increasing enrolment rate. It commended the advancement in health-care quality, assistance to those suffering from HIV and the initiatives to secure the right to adequate housing. 71. India welcomed measures to strengthen the institutional and human rights infrastructure and the steps taken to strengthen the independence of the judiciary and to reform the justice system. 72. Indonesia welcomed progress in protecting human rights and particularly in combating violence against women, noting the adoption of Law 25/11 against Domestic Violence. 73. The Islamic Republic of Iran noted that progress had been made in poverty reduction, the adoption of the framework law and action plan on education for all, and judicial reform. 74. Ireland welcomed positive efforts by Angola and expressed concern at reports of intimidation and arbitrary detention of human rights defenders, journalists and civil society actors. 75. Israel commended the new Constitution of Angola, the recent successful elections, and the ratification of CRPD and OP-CRPD, and asked about measures and activities undertaken to improve human rights. 76. Italy welcomed the signing of CAT, legislation on women’s rights and their role in the family and society, and measures to protect children’s rights. 77. Kenya noted the country’s accession to core instruments, policies on combating poverty and supporting rural women, and legal reform; it encouraged efforts to meet women’s and children’s needs. 78. Kuwait welcomed the adoption of the new Constitution, which guaranteed rights and freedoms and prohibited discrimination, and applauded the national strategy on education, including initiatives towards improving literacy. 79. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic welcomed efforts to enhance freedom of expression, to improve the education system and access to health-care and to eliminate violence against women and children. 80. Lebanon commended the Constitution, which guaranteed collective and individual rights, prohibited discrimination and enshrined international instruments on human rights and trafficking. The recent elections had strengthened democracy. 81. Lesotho commended the country’s achievement in realizing the right to education, enacting the Protection and Full Development of the Child Act of 2012 and establishing the National Council for Persons with Disabilities.  82. The delegation of Angola provided information on measures to combat violence against children, forced marriage and child labour. There was a system of recording such cases, administered by the national institute for children. Judges, in investigating such cases, must ensure that the child was represented. Children were given the necessary support in schools and by the police, as there were special police stations to deal with day-to-day events involving children. SOS call centres were being established to receive complaints. Civil society monitored follow-up on complaints. The networks involved coordination and dialogue between communities and authorities, with involvement of children. The delegation provided information on strategies to combat child labour through information campaigns and awareness-raising as well as through education within families and communities. Violence against children and forced marriage were considered to be crimes.  83. With regard to domestic violence, the delegation described action taken to improve conditions for women through programmes to prevent domestic violence and protect victims. The Government was also mobilizing society and raising public awareness with regard to sexual violence against women and girls.  84. The government had set up, for victims of domestic violence, a network of free legal advisory centres, shelters and channels for out of court settlement of disputes. Partnerships had been established with religious organizations and civil society. There had also been awareness-raising campaigns to combat domestic violence.  85. In August 2014, a national forum for rural women had been held where women could present their ideas and join the dialogue with the Government on what was needed and how that could be provided. The delegation provided information on the national programme to provide assistance to women.  86. The health-care system was based on primary health care, which was free of charge and focused primarily on the health of women and children, with a view to reducing maternal and infant mortality rates. The delegation provided information on the budget for health care and stated that the Government had a health-care plan up to 2025. 87. Ratification of CAT was nearing the end of the process. However, article 6 of the Constitution expressly prohibited torture. Also, torture was punishable by law.  88. There were no restrictions on Muslim communities, and respect for freedom of worship was guaranteed in the Constitution. There was editorial diversity in the media and a new law on the media would be adopted. The Government had been stepping up policies to prevent possible violations of the rights of migrants and immigrants. The delegation provided information on the Government’s demining activities.  89. Libya noted the ratification of international conventions, and judicial system reform, including the body established to ensure the compliance of national legislation with international instruments, leading to laws that strengthened human rights. 90. Malaysia commended the adoption of the Strategy for Preventing and Combating Violence against Children. It also acknowledged the achievement in illiteracy reduction and enrolment increase. 91. Maldives urged Angola to ratify international instruments, and commended legislation on domestic violence. It encouraged efforts to improve the economic situation of poor and rural communities. 92. Mali noted the country’s ratification of international instruments and their incorporation into national legislation, and the protection of women’s rights, particularly regarding gender-based violence and early marriage. 93. Mauritania welcomed the country’s accession to international instruments, measures taken to advance women rights, and the National Development Plan. It encouraged efforts towards greater access to education and health. 94. Mexico commended the normative progress, including the ratification of CRPD and the legislation against domestic violence, and the creation of the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights.  95. Montenegro asked about the elimination of stereotypes and harmful practices; steps to improve women’s rights and implement CEDAW; and progress towards ratifying CAT, ICERD and the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. 96. Morocco welcomed the country’s determination to promote democracy and human rights, the amalgamation of the Ministry of Justice and the Office of the Secretariat of State for Human Rights, the country’s cooperation with OHCHR, and legislative and judicial reform.  97. Mozambique noted the ratification by Angola of international human rights instruments, its contribution to combating trafficking in persons, and the efforts it had made towards establishing a national human rights institution. 98. Myanmar commended the measures taken to promote and protect human rights. It welcomed the adoption and implementation of sustainable development and poverty reduction programmes. 99. Namibia commended efforts to consolidate constitutional provisions, align national legislation with international legal instruments, and establish the Ombudsman’s Office in compliance with the Paris Principles. 100. The Netherlands welcomed the development of national legislation, particularly regarding domestic violence, and the country’s accession to treaties. It expressed concern about the growing inequality in wealth distribution. 101. New Zealand recognized the progress made, and commended efforts to promote economic development. It welcomed the ratification of international human rights treaties, including CRPD. 102. The Niger noted the Constitution and its provisions against discrimination, and significant judicial reform. It commended cooperation with human rights mechanisms and the ratification of international instruments. 103. Nigeria applauded the adoption of the new Constitution and ratification of CRPD and OP-CRPD, and encouraged Angola to implement recommendations on human rights defenders and fulfil its obligations under other ratified instruments. 104. Norway commended the new Constitution, the adoption of international conventions and cooperation on implementation of obligations, noted the strengthening of financial management, and acknowledged the country’s Kimberley Process commitments. It expressed concern regarding freedom of expression. 105. The Philippines noted progress in national legislative and institutional frameworks, leading to better protection mechanisms. It welcomed the country’s signature of international human rights conventions and campaigns for gender equality. 106. Portugal commended the country’s cooperation with human rights bodies; its signature of the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (ICCPR-OP 2) and the Optional Protocol to ICESCR (OP-ICESCR); and efforts in the areas of gender equality and violence against women and children. 107. The Republic of Korea welcomed the country’s signing of and/or accession to CRPD, ICERD, ICCPR-OP 2, CAT and OP-CAT and the establishment of national human rights bodies; it also noted civil registration concerns. 108. Romania commended the country’s signature and ratification of human rights conventions, as well as its adoption and implementation of laws on domestic violence and on child protection and development. 109. The Russian Federation welcomed progress regarding democratic institutions, human rights and civil liberties. It noted measures regarding domestic violence, children’s rights and human rights institutions. 110. Rwanda commended the judicial reform, and institutional and policy initiatives. It noted the country’s signature of ICCPR-OP 2, and said it looked forward to the ratification of that instrument. It commended efforts regarding gender equality. 111. Senegal welcomed efforts regarding human rights, including the establishment of the National Family Council and the National Children’s Council, and ratification of CRPD. 112. Serbia commended the national human rights framework and the country’s signature of CAT, OP-CAT and ICERD. Taking note of the country’s efforts regarding protection of refugees, it requested information on the repatriation process. 113. Sierra Leone commended measures to promote economic and social rights, the right to health and children’s rights, and efforts regarding domestic violence and microcredit programmes for women living in rural areas.  114. Singapore noted the incorporation of international instruments into the Constitution and national legislation, and efforts regarding the rights of persons with disabilities, including the ratification of CRPD. 115. Slovenia commended the ratification of CRPD and OP-CRPD, and the adoption of measures on gender equality, domestic violence and support for women in rural areas. 116. South Africa welcomed progress regarding the Constitution and the protection of women and children, and noted that consideration had been given to establishing a national human rights institution.  117. South Sudan welcomed the strengthened institutions, noting the incorporation of provisions of international instruments into the Constitution, judicial reform and measures to prevent and combat human trafficking. 118. Spain welcomed the ratification of international instruments, commitments regarding water and sanitation, and domestic violence legislation. It also noted reports on inadequate follow-up on human rights violations. 119. Sri Lanka commended legislative and institutional measures to protect children and promote gender equality, noting that policy implementation focused particularly on women in rural areas. 120. The State of Palestine welcomed efforts to implement recommendations, especially those concerning health and education services in rural areas, and recognized remaining challenges in that regard. 121. The Sudan noted the country’s commitment to human rights, in particular the ratification of CRPD and its Optional Protocol and the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. 122. Sweden welcomed the country’s signature of international instruments, and expressed concerns regarding arbitrary arrest and detention and acts of torture by police and security forces. 123. Switzerland expressed concern regarding torture and ill-treatment, and poor treatment of civil society by the authorities. It encouraged Angola to end impunity for serious human rights violations. 124. Thailand applauded the achievement of Millennium Development Goal 1, commended efforts on food safety, poverty eradication and rural development, and offered technical assistance regarding the right to development. 125. Timor-Leste noted positive steps, particularly the progress towards ratifying ICERD. It also recognized progress regarding women’s and children’s rights, highlighting the Law on Domestic Violence. 126. Togo welcomed efforts to promote gender equality, noting policies to allow women access to health care, education, property, housing and microcredit, and encouraged continued efforts in human rights protection. 127. Tunisia noted the adoption of the new Constitution, ratification of international human rights instruments, and judicial reform. It encouraged efforts to combat violence against women and children. 128. Turkey requested information about the ratification of ICCPR-OP 2. It recognized efforts regarding civil registration and literacy, and encouraged the work on gender equality and combating gender-based violence. 129. The United Arab Emirates welcomed the incorporation of fundamental principles into national legislation, and noted social measures, particularly in health care, education and violence against women. It requested information on national strategies concerning human trafficking. 130. The delegation of Angola touched on some of the recommendations received. It reiterated that, in terms of the forces of law and order, the Government was acting within the law. All complaints received on the excessive use of force had been processed. The competent authorities had carried out the necessary investigations and prosecutions. The Government had paid the closest possible attention to those matters.  131. The law guaranteed freedom of assembly. Such events took place without any problems. There had been exceptional cases, where the conduct of the forces of law and order had been called into question. However, that conduct was consistent with the responsibility to protect the public.  132. With regard to freedom of expression, there were no cases of persons who had been detained or sentenced for expressing their opinions. The delegation reiterated that the State had never taken any decision to close down newspapers and radio stations that freely expressed their opinions. The private radio stations operated daily in Angola free of any difficulties and restrictions. 133. The Government would do all it could to implement the recommendations accepted during the review. Many recommendations were consistent with the Government’s programmes and priorities. Reducing poverty, in particular extreme poverty, was one of the main priorities. In 2000, 92 per cent of the people lived in extreme poverty; that rate had since fallen to 52 per cent, an indication of how much had been done to address the matter. The Government was also working on adequate housing, expanding schools and improving medical services, increasing sanitation facilities, and promoting job creation. Those were all priorities addressed through structured programmes within the National Development Programme 2014–2017.   II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**  ** The conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 134. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue and listed below have been examined by and enjoy the support of Angola: 134.1 Promptly ratify and implement the human rights conventions signed in September 2013 (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);  134.2 Carry out all necessary efforts aimed at achieving the ratification of the human rights treaties signed by Angola between 2013 and 2014 (Uruguay);  134.3 Ratify as early as possible all international human rights instruments that Angola has signed, and incorporate the provisions of these conventions into national legislation (France);  134.4 Speed up the process of ratification of the conventions it has signed, and consider acceding to other international human rights instruments to which it is not yet a party, such as the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW) (Philippines); 134.5 Ratify all the signed conventions, in keeping with the commitments it had undertaken during its first review in 2010 (Central African Republic);  134.6 Attain as soon as possible the ratification of major international legal instruments already signed by Angola (Cabo Verde);  134.7 Take appropriate steps to accelerate the ratification process on the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Viet Nam);  134.8 Finalize the ratification process for the five instruments it has signed (Zimbabwe);  134.9 Continue its efforts for ratification of ICERD and CAT (Azerbaijan);  134.10 Swiftly ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and adopt all necessary measures to enact it at the national level, in particular with regard to improving living standards in prison and preventing abuse and ill-treatment of detainees (Italy);  134.11 Continue the process of accession to international human rights instruments, particularly the ratification of CAT and OP-CAT and ICERD (Brazil);  134.12 Continue and complete the signature and ratification process of the various relevant international human rights instruments (Benin);  134.13 Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Burkina Faso);  134.14 Consider the possibility of ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Ecuador);  134.15 To pursue its efforts to accede to international instruments, in particular human rights instruments (Côte d’Ivoire);  134.16 Ratify CAT and OP-CAT without delay (Czech Republic);  134.17 Ratify the Convention against Torture and its Optional Protocol (Denmark);  134.18 Finalize the ratification of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Gabon);  134.19 Ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, and the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Ghana); 134.20 Continue and expedite the ratification process of CAT (Indonesia);  134.21 Complete, without delay, the ratification of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Kenya);  134.22 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (Lebanon);  134.23 Take necessary steps to ratify or accede to other major international human rights instruments which are still outstanding (Lesotho);  134.24 Ratify ICRMW (Mali);  134.25 Complete the internal legal procedure in order to ratify ICCPR-OP 2 (Montenegro);  134.26 Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Mexico);  134.27 Consider taking the requisite measures aimed at the speedy ratification of all the outstanding international human rights instruments accepted in 2010, these being ICCPR-OP 2, CAT, OP-CAT and OP-ICESCR (Namibia);  134.28 Continue attention towards further ratifications, including CAT and ICERD (New Zealand);  134.29 Ratify CAT as soon as possible and fully implement it without delay (Switzerland);  134.30 Ratify ICCPR-OP 2 and OP-ICESCR, as recommended previously; approve a National Action Plan on Women Peace and Security in accordance with Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) (Portugal);  134.31 Ratify CAT, ICRMW, ICERD and the Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Sierra Leone);  134.32 Proceed with the ratification of the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty, and the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (South Africa);  134.33 Complete the process of ratification of all conventions it has signed, in particular the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and its Optional Protocol (Togo);  134.34 Ratify the international instruments it has already signed, in particular the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Convention against Torture and its Optional Protocol (Tunisia);  134.35 Accelerate the process of legal reform with the aim of harmonizing the internal regulations with the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Uruguay);  134.36 Continue further improvement of the legislative framework regarding rights of women in Angola (Azerbaijan);  134.37 Ensure harmonization of the Law on Domestic Violence and the child law with international human rights standards (Uruguay);  134.38 Continue to introduce legislation to fulfil its obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Australia);  134.39 Adopt a law, in line with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, that criminalizes all forms of violence against children (Botswana);  134.40 Address deficiencies in the legal framework of the electoral process; abolish restrictions on domestic and international observation; strengthen independence and transparency of the Electoral Commission and deal with flaws in the voters’ register and with problems with the media coverage (Czech Republic);  134.41 Amend the Freedom of Information Act so that it is in compliance with regional and international standards (Czech Republic);  134.42 Adopt legal provisions prohibiting traditional harmful practices against women, including adequate sanctions for violations of these provisions (Estonia);  134.43 Continue to strengthen its domestic legislation to implement its international human rights obligations (Singapore);  134.44 Create and operationalize a national human rights institution for the promotion and protection of human rights (Morocco);  134.45 Follow up on and establish a national human rights institution (Niger);  134.46 Confer the Ombudsman’s Office (Provedor de Justiça) with the necessary legal framework to enable it to effectively function as the National Human Rights Institution (Portugal);  134.47 Promote the accreditation of the Ombudsman’s Office (Provedor de Justiça) as a National Human Rights Institution with “A” Status in accordance with the Paris Principles (Portugal);  134.48 Strengthen the mandate of the Provedor de Justiça and ensure it functions in accordance with the Paris Principles (South Africa);  134.49 Take to ensure the establishment of a body such as the National Human Rights Committee (Republic of Korea);  134.50 Bring its national Office of the Ombudsman into line with the Paris Principles (Sierra Leone);  134.51 Consider establishing a National Human Rights Institution and committing to full integration of gender perspective in all efforts vested in the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals (Slovenia);  134.52 Exert more efforts in setting up a National Human Rights Institution to address questions relating to the promotion and protection of human rights (Sudan);  134.53 Consider setting up an independent national human rights institution to oversee and monitor human rights situations in the country and to promote public awareness on the promotion and protection of human rights (Thailand);  134.54 Increase efforts to promote human rights culture in the country (Uzbekistan);  134.55 Further expand the initiatives aimed at reaching better protection of the rights of the child (Armenia); 134.56 Conduct further human rights education activities for public servants, in particular law enforcement officers, with a view to keeping up with the constitutional and legal reform as well as newly joined international human rights legal instruments (Viet Nam);  134.57 Promote awareness of officers charged with law enforcement on matters related to human rights values and principles (Egypt);  134.58 Continue its cooperation with the United Nations Development Programme to strengthen the technical and functional capacities of the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights (Equatorial Guinea);  134.59 Improve the situation of women and children by implementing  Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security and adopting a relevant national action plan (Estonia);  134.60 Devote adequate human and financial resources for the effective implementation of the National Policy for Gender Equality and Equity of 2013 (India);  134.61 Continue its cooperation with the United Nations, other international organizations and human rights mechanisms to overcome remaining constraints and challenges (Lao People’s Democratic Republic);  134.62 Continue its reforms to improve policies and programs towards promotion and protection of all human rights (Lesotho);  134.63 Provide the necessary support, including financial, for the specialized institution to monitor the human rights situation (Russian Federation);  134.64 Continue to involve Angolan civil society actors, notably those working in the field of human rights, in the implementation of the policy already defined by the Government (Senegal);  134.65 Invite the Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression to visit Angola in order to demonstrate your commitment to foster an environment where journalists, civil society, and opposition members can operate freely and independently (United States of America); 134.66 Further strengthen its activities undertaken to combat discrimination, in particular with regard to children with disabilities, children with HIV/AIDS and San children (Israel);  134.67. Take measures, in collaboration with civil society organizations, aimed at ensuring women’s right to non-discrimination and equality, as proposed by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (Netherlands);  134.68 Continue to address persistent discriminatory practices that hinder equal participation of women in economic, socio-civic, political, and all other spheres, by encouraging educational institutions and media practitioners to portray women as capable leaders and as significant contributors to growth and development of a society (Philippines);  134.69 Continue implementing its national programs and policies to advance women’s rights and ensure quality education of children, especially in rural areas (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea);  134.70 Continue efforts aimed at increasing women’s access to employment, public life, education, housing and health, through their full participation in the political, economic, social and cultural fields (Ecuador);  134.71 Further improve the conditions of women’s in rural areas (Ethiopia);  134.72 Continue addressing the existence of certain practices and stereotypes derived from cultural practices which could result in discrimination against women and girls (Myanmar);  134.73 Strongly regulate the issue of the civil registration in order to grant legal personality to all human beings on its territory (Democratic Republic of the Congo);  134.74 Strengthen and facilitate the process already undertaken of the civil registration (Equatorial Guinea);  134.75 Improve the birth registration system, as previously recommended (Italy);  134.76 Extend the length of the special campaign promoting the civil registry and make permanent the fee exemption for such registration (Mexico);  134.77 Continue its special civil registration campaign (Togo);  134.78 Take appropriate measures for the immediate completion of the registration of citizens, in particular children under the age of 4, who have not had their birth registration carried out (Republic of Korea);  134.79 Finalize legislation on free birth registration for all citizens and enhance registration systems and continue campaigns to this effect (Sierra Leone);  134.80 Consider without delay to adopt a new legislation on free birth registration (Slovenia);  134.81 That the registration system be further improved and supported by awareness-raising activities, in order to sustain the rise in registration numbers (Turkey);  134.82 Step up its efforts to prevent cases of arbitrary arrests, detention and torture, and that those responsible be brought to justice (Italy);  134.83 Enact legislation to guarantee the prohibition of torture and ill-treatment, as recognized in the Constitution, and in line with the Convention against Torture (Maldives);  134.84 Investigate and, if it is the case, put an end to cases of arbitrary arrest, illegal detentions and torture by the police and security forces (Spain);  134.85 Activate the efforts to combat trafficking in persons, and rehabilitate its victims (Lebanon);  134.86 Continue its efforts in combating trafficking in persons and protect the victims thereof within the framework of implementing its own national legislation and within the country’s international commitments (United Arab Emirates);  134.87 Explicitly prohibit all forms of corporal punishment in the upbringing and education of children (Uruguay);  134.88 Continue the efforts to prevent and fight violence against children (Algeria);  134.89 Strengthen the fight against harmful traditional practices, such as the stigmatization of children accused of sorcery (Chad);  134.90 Fight against the phenomenon of child sorcerers to spare innocent childhood from this terrible calamity of another age (Democratic Republic of the Congo);  134.91 Protect children accused of witchcraft from ill-treatment and abuse, as previously recommended (Italy);  134.92 Stop child labour, as previously recommended (Italy);  134.93 Continue giving due attention to the issue of violence against children by ensuring effective implementation of the Strategy for Preventing and Combating Violence against Children (Malaysia); 134.94 Continue to implement the National Strategy for Preventing and Combating Violence against Children (Mexico);  134.95 Continue to strengthen efforts to eliminate all types of violence against children including through the criminalization of corporal punishment (Portugal);  134.96 Adopt policies and measures in order to prevent the sexual exploitation of children and to facilitate the social integration of those who were victims of such a crime (Romania);  134.97 Continue efforts to implement the action plan 2013–2017 to fight domestic violence (Algeria);  134.98 Deepen actions to ensure effective implementation of the legislation on the protection of women, especially against all harmful practice or negative stereotyping (Argentina);  134.99 Implement fully the 2011 law against domestic abuse and continue its efforts to fulfil its obligations under CEDAW (Australia);  134.100 Ensure full implementation of Law 25/11 against Domestic Violence and ensure there are increased protections against all forms of violence faced by women, including internally displaced and refugee women, who are among the most vulnerable (Canada);  134.101 Promote concerted national efforts aimed at combating violence against women, and providing rehabilitation for perpetrators of such acts (Egypt);  134.102 Ensure the country-wide and effective implementation of the Law on Domestic Violence, and ensure access of victims to medical (including psychological), legal and social support (Germany);  134.103 Enhance efforts to implement existing policy instruments aiming at protecting women’s rights, and to enhance the support given to victims of violence, for example through adequate resourcing of counselling centres (Italy);  134.104 Adopts practical measures to implement the Law on Domestic Violence (and its legal instruments), and that Angola allocates a multi-annual budget to the Ministry involved to this effect (Netherlands);  134.105 Ensure effective and practical implementation of the Law on Domestic Violence and the law on the protection of children’s comprehensive development (Russian Federation);  134.106 Expand the legal coverage to protect against sexual harassment and intensify public awareness-raising campaigns in the field of violence against women (Spain);  134.107 Consider adopting a national strategy to fight against all forms of violence against women (Turkey);  134.108 Take further steps to reform the judicial and penal system through the training of detention and prison staff, and the creation of adequate incarceration centres so as to avoid the abuse of arbitrary detention and to eliminate the excessive use of force by penitentiary personnel (Holy See);  134.109 Complete the reform of the judiciary (Benin);  134.110 Deepen efforts to strengthen the judiciary, such as the establishment of the commission for the reform of the legislative and the judiciary (Brazil);  134.111 Further work on improving the judicial system by providing capacity-building assistance and training in the field of human rights (Ethiopia);  134.112 Accelerate the process of judicial reforms with a view to ensure access to justice, especially to women and other vulnerable sections of the society (India);  134.113 Continue its efforts for the promotion and protection of human rights by the improvement of its judicial system (Niger);  134.114 Ensure that allegations of human rights violations by security forces are subjected to independent and impartial investigations and more generally take measures to strengthen the fight against impunity (France);  134.115 Ensure that allegations of abuse by members of security forces are investigated in a prompt, thorough, credible and impartial manner; that those responsible, including officials with oversight responsibility are disciplined or prosecuted in accordance with international standards; and that victims of abuse receive adequate compensation by the State (Germany);  134.116 Ensure that prompt, impartial and thorough investigations are carried out into all allegations of human rights violations by security forces and that the perpetrators are brought to justice, as accepted in the previous review (Sweden);  134.117 Ensure reparation, including fair and adequate compensation, for victims of human rights violations by the security forces or to their families where the victim has died (Sweden);  134.118 Consider improving the juvenile justice system by integrating and implementing the child friendly justice standards, including by, inter alia, ensuring that children benefit from the protection of specific provisions for children in conflict with the law; and establishing specialized procedural rules to ensure that all juvenile justice guarantees are respected, and ensuring that children are held in detention only as a last resort and separately from adults in both pre-trial detention and after being sentenced (Serbia); 134.119 Hold security forces and other government officials accountable for human rights violations, including those involving unlawful killings, sexual violence and torture, by credibly investigating and prosecuting offenders as appropriate (United States of America);  134.120 Take measures to fight impunity of State agents guilty of serious human rights violations and facilitate access to justice for their victims (Switzerland);  134.121 Intensify its efforts to strengthen the legal mechanism in order to improve the access of people to the justice system (Iran (Islamic Republic of));  134.122 Demonstrate greater flexibility and tolerance with respect to religious minorities by reforming Law 2/04 on Freedom of Religion to conform to the provisions of the Angolan Constitution, as well as international human rights obligations (Canada);  134.123 Fully respect freedom of expression, opinion, association and peaceful assembly in accordance with Angola’s obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Belgium);  134.124 Amend its legislation to protect freedom of expression, including freedom of the press (Slovenia);  134.125 Ensure the protection of the rights of individuals – including members of civil society organizations, the media and the political opposition – to assemble and speak free from intimidation and harassment (Canada);  134.126 Improve the space for free operation of independent media, including state media, reinforce monitoring and sanctioning of abuses of media legislation and create an enabling working environment for journalists (Czech Republic);  134.127 Take measures to fully guarantee the respect of freedom of expression and of freedom of association and assembly (France);  134.128 Create and maintain, in law and in practice, a safe and enabling environment, in which human rights defenders, journalists and civil society can operate free from hindrance and insecurity, in accordance with Human Rights Council resolutions 22/6, 27/5 and 27/31 (Ireland);  134.129 Further promote freedom of expression, association and the press (Senegal);  134.130 Respect, protect and promote freedom of expression of journalists, in particular with regard to the well-established international human rights principle that public officials should tolerate more, rather than less, criticism than private individuals (Sweden);  134.131 Respect the right of peaceful association according to its domestic law and international human rights law (Costa Rica);  134.132 Make procedures for registration of civil society organizations transparent, non-discriminatory and expeditious (Norway);  134.133 Take the necessary measures to create a safe and favourable environment for civil society by respecting the human rights of all individuals, in particular the rights to freedom of expression and association (Switzerland);  134.134 Fully respect peaceful assembly in accordance with Angolan and international human rights law (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);  134.135 To step up its current efforts aiming at strengthening women participation in the political and economic life of the country (Burundi);  134.136 Continue to promote the role of women in society in order to ensure their integration into political life (Timor-Leste);  134.137 Adopt practical measures to ensure the right to peaceful assembly guaranteeing the proportionality in the use of force by security forces (Spain);  134.138 Continue to improve standards of living; ensure broad public access to quality education and health services (Uzbekistan);  134.139 Continue to improve infrastructure and public services, especially medical and educational facilities in the rural areas (Thailand);  134.140 Promote and protect the rights of peasants and other people working in rural areas (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 134.141 Ensure that its housing policy is drafted and implemented in accordance with international human rights standards, including access to an effective remedy and adequate compensation, and that the necessary assistance is provided to all evicted persons (Germany);  134.142 Intensify efforts to achieve further gains in the areas of poverty reduction, especially focusing on providing necessary resources to realize the right to adequate housing and improving the living conditions of the people in rural areas (Sri Lanka);  134.143 Continue actions to improve compliance with the human right to water, in the framework of General Assembly resolution 64/292 (Bolivia (Plurinational State of));  134.144 Develop a strategic plan for the supply of water and sanitation, in particular for rural communities (Spain);  134.145 Continue to intensify endeavours for combating poverty at local level and for integration of vulnerable population into the economy (United Republic of Tanzania);  134.146 Further advance in eradicating poverty through its accurate social policies to increase the quality of life of its people, particularly of the most vulnerable (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of));  134.147 Continue its decisive efforts to make progress in fighting poverty and in overcoming social inequity (Belarus);  134.148 Continue to increase human and financial resources allocated by the Government to fight poverty and improve services in the fields of health and education (Cabo Verde);  134.149 Continue to improve and implement the poverty reduction strategy with the emphasis on lifting vulnerable groups, like women in rural areas, out of poverty (China);  134.150 Keep the fight against poverty, in particular through the implementation of the integrated municipal rural-development and poverty-control programs (Cuba);  134.151 Increase its efforts in protecting the human rights of the poor and the disadvantaged, particularly women and children (Holy See);  134.152 Strengthen its efforts to combat hunger and poverty in the country (Iran (Islamic Republic of));  134.153 Pay special attention to the needs of women in strategies to combat poverty, ensuring that women have enhanced access to health, education, clean water and sanitation and income-generating activities (State of Palestine);  134.154 Continue implementing the integrated programme of rural development and the fight against poverty (Sudan);  134.155 Take the necessary measures to guarantee affordable and high quality health care throughout the country (Belgium);  134.156 Continue the implementation of the municipal health service program and the national development program 2012–2015 (Dominican Republic);  134.157 Continue the implementation of immunization and health information programs (Dominican Republic);  134.158 Continue the efforts to improve the health care especially of children and the elderly persons, as well as those suffering from HIV (Holy See);  134.159 Take action at all levels to address the interlinked root causes of preventable mortality and morbidity of children under 5 and consider applying the “Technical guidance on the application of a human rights-based approach to the implementation of policies and programmes to reduce and eliminate preventable mortality of children under 5 years of age” (A/HRC/27/31) (Ireland);  134.160 Conduct a survey on child mortality in order to get updated and reliable data (Norway);  134.161 Cooperate with specialized United Nations bodies to develop the health sector in accordance with the national plan of 2012–2025 (Kuwait);  134.162 Promote and develop the national plan to combat HIV (Lebanon);  134.163 The allocation of additional efforts and resources to improving the country’s health system (Turkey);  134.164 Take additional measures to ensure that all children have access to primary and secondary education (Belgium);  134.165 Integrate human rights education into primary and secondary school curricula (Zimbabwe);  134.166 Encouraged to bring human rights into the curriculum by, among others, training teachers (Djibouti);  134.167 Continue to increase education input to ensure the right to education for all the people (China);  134.168 Continue with the implementation of literacy and remedial education, especially in rural areas (Dominican Republic);  134.169 Realize the right to education for all, including human rights education, by inter alia, ensuring the effective implementation of the law providing for free primary education (Germany);  134.170 Continue its efforts to improve the national system to access education for all children (Iran (Islamic Republic of));  134.171 Improve and facilitate access to education, in particular of girls, as previously recommended (Italy);  134.172 Continue its literacy campaign in cooperation with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) (Kuwait);  134.173 Continue its positive measures to realize the right to education of its citizens (Malaysia);  134.174 Intensify efforts to fully implement legislation to provide free education for all children, to ensure all children have equal access to education (Maldives);  134.175 Integrate human rights in the school curricula (Morocco);  134.176 Take steps to ensure universal enrolment in primary school for both boys and girls and to increase attendance of secondary schools, as well as to ensure the integration of human rights into school curricula at all levels (State of Palestine);  134.177 Ensure equal access to education for women and girls (Turkey);  134.178 Encouraged to promote and protect the rights of vulnerable persons including persons with disabilities (Djibouti);  134.179 Continue the development of programs that aim to incorporate the participation and contribution of persons with disabilities in society (Israel);  134.180 Continue in its efforts to help persons with disabilities and integrate them into society as real partners (Kuwait);  134.181 Continue its efforts to create an inclusive society for persons with disabilities through the National Council for the Protection of Persons with Disabilities which monitors the implementation of the policies (Singapore);  134.182 Deepen measures aimed at guaranteeing the rights of migrants, asylum seekers and refugees, particularly to end the acts of discrimination and violence, and to investigate, prosecute and punish the perpetrators (Argentina);  134.183 Request the assistance of United Nations bodies in the area of regulating migration flows, in order to set up techniques to support and facilitate the return and reintegration in dignity and security of Angolan displaced persons and refugees (Côte d’Ivoire);  134.184 Consider its pending reservations on the international instruments relating to refugees and displaced persons so as not to create any stateless persons, despite migratory pressures (Democratic Republic of the Congo);  134.185 Finalise the draft national policy on migration developed in consultation with the International Organization for Migration (France);  134.186 Work to relax its migration policy, by focusing on return with dignity of irregular migrants to their countries of origin (Senegal);  134.187 Immediately cease all forms of forced displacement, in accordance with the applicable international humanitarian and human rights law and the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement (1998) (Australia);  134.188 Give proper follow-up to the resolution which forbids the forced evictions of persons, and defend the rights of the displaced and indigenous people (Holy See);  134.189 Continue to implement the National Strategy for Long-Term Development “Angola 2025” (Cuba);  134.190 Continue implementing the 2013–2017 National Development Plan (Myanmar);  134.191 Undertake further work to address access to profits from natural resources, including the role of the corporate sector in social development (New Zealand);  134.192 Comprehensively address the issue of corruption and further promote transparency (Sierra Leone). 135. The following recommendations will be examined by Angola, which will respond in due course, but no later than the twenty-eighth session of the Human Rights Council in March 2015: 135.1 Accede to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Armenia); 135.2 Consider ratification of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC) (Botswana);  135.3 Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Costa Rica); 135.4 Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Romania);  135.5 Consider ratifying the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Rwanda);  135.6 Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the International Criminal Court (Estonia);  135.7 Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Ghana); 135.8 Ratify the Rome Statute (Tunisia); 135.9 Accede to and fully align its national legislation with the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court; including by incorporating provisions to cooperate promptly and fully with the Court (Montenegro);  135.10 Make further efforts to ratify and fully align its national legislation with the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Republic of Korea); 135.11 Consider ratification and full alignment of national legislation with the Rome Statute, including by incorporating provisions to cooperate promptly and fully with the International Criminal Court and to investigate and prosecute genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes effectively before its national courts, and accede to the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the International Criminal Court (Slovenia);  135.12 Create a National Human Rights Institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Uruguay);  135.13 Seek to expedite the current process of establishing a National Human Rights Institution, with a view to further improving the general situation of human rights in Angola (Egypt);  135.14 Establish an independent national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (France);  135.15 Create and implement a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Gabon);  135.16 Expedite efforts in its consideration of setting up an independent National Human Rights Institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Ghana);  135.17 Take further steps for the establishment of a human rights institution functioning in accordance with the Paris Principles (Greece);  135.18 Actively consider establishing a full-fledged national human rights institution in line with the Paris Principles (India);  135.19 Intensify its efforts to establish National Human Rights Institution in compliance with the Paris Principles (Indonesia);  135.20 Take steps towards the establishment and operationalization of a national human rights institution, in accordance with the Paris Principles (Kenya);  135.21 Establish a national institution for human rights, in conformity with the Paris Principles (Mali);  135.22 Intensify its efforts to establish a National Human Rights Institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Rwanda);  135.23 Accelerate the process of establishing of the National Human Rights Institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (South Sudan);  135.24 Set up a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Togo);  135.25 Establish a national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles, and extend a standing invitation to the Council mandate holders (Tunisia);  135.26 Consider partnership in the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, including an open dialogue with civil society (Norway);  135.27 Issue a standing invitation to the United Nations human rights special procedures (Czech Republic);  135.28 Consider issuing a standing invitation to all special procedures (Ghana); 135.29 Consider issuing a standing invitation to the United Nations human rights special procedures (Rwanda);  135.30 Ensure freedom of expression and media freedom by bringing national legislation into line with international standards, including by decriminalizing defamation and related offences in relevant national laws (Estonia); 135.31 End the practice of using criminal defamation laws to restrict freedom of expression and peaceful assembly and association in accordance with international obligations (United States of America);  135.32 Repeal criminal defamation laws, particularly those providing special punishment for alleged defamation (Sweden);  135.33 Decriminalize press offences, and allow private radio broadcasting at the national level (Norway);  135.34 Respect the right to peaceful assembly in accordance with Angolan and international human rights law; take steps to decriminalise press offences, in line with international standards; and ensure journalists and human rights defenders are not intimidated (Australia). 136. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole.  Annex [English only]   Composition of the delegation The delegation of Angola was headed by H.E. Rui Jorge Carneiro Mangueira, Minister of Justice and Human Rights, and composed of the following members: • Manuel Augusto, Secretary of State for External Relations; • José Bamokina Zau, Secretary of State for Home Affairs; • Paula Sacramento Neto, Secretary of State for Family and Women Promotion; • Carlos Alberto Masseca, Secretary of State for Health; • Margarida Izata, Ambassador/ Director for Multilateral Affairs, Ministry of External Relations; • Apolinário Correia, Ambassador/Permanent Representative in Geneva  • Osvaldo Varela, Ambassador in Bern;  • Teresa Manuela, Under–General Prosecutor of Republic; • Manuel Bambi, Prosecutor of Republic; • Ruth Madalena Mixinge, General Director, National Institute for Child; • Ana Celeste Januário, Director for Human Rights Department, Ministry of Justice and Human Rights; • Adriano Gaspar, Director for International Exchange Department, Ministry of Family and Women Promotion; • Isabel Fernandes, Director for Legal Department, Ministry of Family and Women Promotion; • António Pombal, Director for International Exchange Department, Ministry of Economy;  • Armindo Feliciano Aurelio, Adviser, Ministry of Home Affairs; •  Maurício Alexandre, Director, Department of Civic Education, Ministry of Home Affairs;  • Mário Francisco, Head of Department, Ministry of Home Affairs; • Sílvia Lunda, Officer, Ministry of Home Affairs; • Luisa de Almeida Cursino, Adviser, Ministry of Justice and Human Rights; • Ana Luisa Silva, Head of Department, Ministry of Justice and Human Rights; • Mário Homero, Head of Department, Ministry of Education; • Júlio de Carvalho, Head of Department, Ministry of Health; • Júulio Kufukila, Head of Department, Ministry for Social Assistance;  • Humberto Roberto, Head of Department, National Institute for Child; • Sónia de Sá, Officer, Legal Department, Presidency of Republic;  • Elizandra Costa, Officer, Office of General Prosecutor; • Flora Gonçalves, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of Angola to the United Nations in New York; • Kátia Cardoso, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of Angola to the United Nations  Office in Geneva; • Manuel Carlos Eduardo, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of Angola to the United Nations  Office in Geneva.     