  United Nations  A/HRC/28/17    General Assembly  Distr.: General 4 December 2014  Original: English  Human Rights Council Twenty-eighth session Agenda item 6 Universal periodic review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   Bosnia and Herzegovina Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–106 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–34 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  35–106 7  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  107–108 15  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  27   Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its twentieth session from 27 October to 7 November 2014. The review of Bosnia and Herzegovina was held at the 16th meeting on 5 November 2014. The delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina was headed by Miladin Dragi.evi., Deputy Minister for Human Rights and Refugees of Bosnia and Herzegovina. At its 18th meeting, held on 7 November 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on Bosnia and Herzegovina. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Bosnia and Herzegovina: Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation and Sierra Leone. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Bosnia and Herzegovina: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/BIH/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/BIH/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/BIH/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, the Czech Republic, Germany, Liechtenstein, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Spain and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Bosnia and Herzegovina through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review.  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, headed by Miladin Dragi.evi., Deputy Minister for Human Rights and Refugees, reported that a number of activities had been launched and carried out following the first universal periodic review. However, the country had been confronted with many economic and developmental problems which had influenced the situation of human rights. Among those problems were the extensive floods which had affected the greater part of the country. 6. The delegation referred to some of the instruments it had recently acceded to, including the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse, the Council of Europe Convention on Contact concerning Children and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (OP-ICESCR). 7. The initial report to the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities had been submitted and the delegation stated that Bosnia and Herzegovina had joined activities of the Council of Europe to improve the situation of persons with disabilities. The Council of Ministers had decided to establish the Council for People with Disabilities of Bosnia and Herzegovina as an advisory body in charge of monitoring the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) and had initiated amendments to the relevant legislation. Bosnia and Herzegovina had ratified the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (ICPPED) in 2012 and recognized the competence of the Committee on Enforced Disappearances. The Missing Persons Institute of Bosnia and Herzegovina had been established and there were efforts under way to create a new management structure for it and a fund to provide support to the families of missing persons. 8. The delegation mentioned measures that were being taken, including expansion of the number of trained officials at the entity level and improvements to the monitoring system of discrimination at the national level through the establishment of a system for collecting data on cases of discrimination. 9. As regards child protection, the delegation referred to the action plan for children and cited several policy documents. 10. With regard to inclusive education, the delegation mentioned a number of measures related to the education of Roma children, including the provision of Roma teaching assistants in cooperation with non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and a number of incentives for enrolment and attendance at school. It noted that the number of children dropping out at primary and secondary level had significantly decreased. 11. The delegation emphasized that the legal and strategic documents governing education had created the preconditions for the development of a tolerant, multi-ethnic environment in schools. 12. The delegation stated that representatives of all minorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina sat on the Council for National Minorities at the State and entity levels. A strategy for Roma and a revised action plan for addressing Roma issues in the areas of employment, housing and health care had been adopted in 2013, and a budget of EUR 1.5 million created for its implementation. A strategic platform to address the issues of national minorities was also being developed. 13. On the issue of social inclusion, the delegation stated that Bosnia and Herzegovina reported regularly on the problems of vulnerable groups and proposed programmes aimed at minorities, children and women victims of violence and trafficking, which were provided through the use of additional funds from the budget and the donor programmes of a number of international organizations. Protection programmes were also undertaken with domestic NGOs. 14. In relation to the right to travel documents, the delegation stressed that citizens who fulfilled the criteria under the legislation on identity cards were entitled to travel documents and significant progress had been made in implementing the relevant regional declaration (the Zagreb Declaration). 15. The delegation noted that in the last 15 years, since trafficking had first been observed in Bosnia and Herzegovina, comprehensive measures had been undertaken to prevent it. The delegation noted that a number of indicators given in international monitoring reports were consistent in their assessment that the problem persisted, but to a much lesser extent than in previous years. The delegation mentioned the adoption of the Strategy to Counter Trafficking in Human Beings in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Action Plan 2013–2015. It noted that it was based on an innovative approach, involving the full participation of civil society. 16. The delegation stated that adequate psychological, medical, social and legal assistance was provided for foreigners who had been victims of trafficking, and mentioned amendments in 2010 to the criminal code of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which introduced the criminal offence of trafficking in persons, in line with relevant international standards. The delegation also provided many other details of the domestic legal framework in relation to trafficking in human beings. 17. Regarding anti-corruption and organized crime, the delegation reported that the Law on the Protection of Persons Reporting Corruption (Whistleblowers) in the Institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina was passed in late 2013. The anti-corruption strategy for the period 2009–2014 and an action plan for the implementation of strategy had been adopted and the delegation provided details of various related legislative and policy measures. 18. In relation to gender issues, the delegation stated that Bosnia and Herzegovina had signed and ratified a number of international conventions dealing with the prohibition of violence against women and domestic violence, and had harmonized national laws and facilitated their implementation. At the entity level, laws and by-laws for the prevention of and protection from domestic violence had been enacted. The new laws provided access to all levels of health care in family planning for women, regardless of the status of their health insurance. 19. The delegation mentioned that the gender action plan had specific sectorial strategies, such as the 2014–2017 action plan of Bosnia and Herzegovina for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), the 2013–2017 strategy for preventing and combating domestic violence of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (the Federation) and the 2014–2019 strategy for combating domestic violence of Republika Srpska. 20. The delegation also mentioned the 2014–2018 strategy for the implementation of the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence, which was in the process of being adopted. Among other measures to which the delegation referred were projects to promote the representation of women in political and public life, implemented by the Agency for Gender Equality of Bosnia and Herzegovina and entity gender centres. A women’s parliamentary caucus of the Federation had been established. From its inception in March 2013, the caucus parties had made a significant effort in organizational development and influence in parliament. 21. The representative of Republika Srpska recalled that the constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina was part of the Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina (the Dayton agreement) and was thus part of an international treaty, as well as of domestic legislation. The constitution set out the limited competencies of the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina and left all other competencies to the entities. Many of the issues being considered by the meeting were within the competencies of Republika Srpska. It was also important to note that the constitution included direct implementation of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. 22. The representative noted that during the period under consideration, Republika Srpska had made significant progress in combating corruption, including the adoption of an action plan and strategy and the formation of an expert group for the monitoring of their implementation. 23. In relation to combating trafficking in human beings, the representative mentioned the important step that had been taken through the harmonization of the criminal code of Republika Srpska with international standards relating to the definition of trafficking. Republika Srpska had also taken measures to implement the recommendations of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in relation to sentenced prisoners. Conditions of detention had been improved and any abuse of authority or use of excessive force or inhuman treatment by police officers was strictly punished. 24. The representative stated that the criminal code of Republika Srpska provided sanctions against incitement of national, racial or religious hatred, discord or intolerance. 25. Republika Srpska had been active in judicial reform, but the representative noted that many judicial institutions had been created in the post-war period in contravention of the constitution. It was necessary to eliminate ethnic discrimination in the work of the Prosecutor’s Office and Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, especially in processing cases of war crimes committed against Serbs. 26. The representative of Republika Srpska expressed the hope that the new Government, which would be constituted after the recent general elections, would support all reasonable proposals for the implementation of the decision in the case of Sejdi. and Finci v. Bosnia and Herzegovina. Republika Srpska had already proposed a way to eliminate all discriminatory election provisions on its territory. The representative also noted that in the case of Maktouf and Damjanovi. v. Bosnia and Herzegovina, the European Court of Human Rights had proposed that the practice of retroactive application of the law in war crimes cases be eliminated, but that the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina had not yet adopted measures to implement this. 27. In relation to the equality of all ethnic minorities, the representative of Republika Srpska noted that none of the entity’s laws contained discriminatory provisions in that respect. Members of the Roma community enjoyed the same rights as other citizens, including health care. Republika Srpska had undertaken numerous measures to advance the status of women, including in combating violence against women, their political participation and employment. Notably, the criminal code had been amended to treat domestic violence as a crime rather than a misdemeanour. Republika Srpska had adopted a strategy on combating domestic violence, a related law and protocols, and had also formed the Council for Children. 28. The representative of the Federation noted that its Government was conscious of the existence of discrimination in certain fields within the entity and was clear in condemning all acts of discrimination. A series of legal measures had been introduced to address the issue, but the entity Government had spoken boldly in favour of constitutional reform, the need to simplify and reduce the structures of governance and against discrimination on any basis. The support of friendly countries was necessary to enable citizens to enjoy the same rights as those in the most developed countries. He noted that, while the entities did have certain competencies, they did not have international legal personality and the statements of the representative of Republika Srpska, which went outside the existing constitutional framework, underlined the need for constitutional reform, which would assist democracy and the fulfilment of the international obligations of Bosnia and Herzegovina. 29. The representative of the Federation stated that education in the entity was within the competency of its cantons and the Federal Ministry had only a coordinating role. However, the Ministry of Education and the Government of the Federation had invested much effort and adopted a strategy and recommendations for the elimination of divided structures and segregation in schools, commonly known as “two schools under one roof”. Those were preconditions for the creation of a multi-ethnic and tolerant environment in schools in the Federation. The representative also highlighted the investment and efforts needed to improve conditions for children with special needs. 30. In relation to employment rights the Government of the Federation was unswervingly committed to respecting the fulfilment of the rights and obligations of both employees and employers. A new modern labour law was being drafted. The Federation regretted the length of some judicial proceedings in labour-related cases. Tackling the informal economy was another priority for the Government of the Federation: new laws on misdemeanours and labour inspection had been adopted to increase employee protection, with increased inspections and penalties. 31. The representative noted that the Government of the Federation fully understood the significance and gravity of the problems caused by corruption and had consequently initiated several major reform processes. The general plan on combating corruption and two related laws were probably the most important recent reforms. Specialized courts and prosecutors’ offices were important elements of those. 32. Significant progress had been made in improving the conditions of detention and the representative mentioned that the legislation had been amended. Particularly important were the provisions for the serving of sentences under home detention orders and for substituting the payment of financial compensation for imprisonment. Those provisions had greatly relieved overcrowding. 33. The representative noted that the damage caused during the recent floods had amounted to billions of euros and the Government of the Federation had undertaken great efforts to help the affected citizens to return to normal life, with a particular emphasis on ensuring the equitable distribution of assistance. 34. The representative highlighted the cooperation of the Federation with the Office of the High Representative and international organizations, such as the International Commission for Missing Persons and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, and thanked them for the assistance of those and numerous other domestic and international institutions. The Government of the Federation remained united in its support for human rights as an overarching priority and would continue to apply itself to full implementation of the accepted international instruments.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 35. During the interactive dialogue, 62 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 36. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia commended the standing invitation to special procedures, the ratification of international instruments and the progress regarding Roma housing needs. It requested details on health and employment measures for Roma. It welcomed the action plans on women, peace and security and children’s rights, requesting information on implementation. 37. Turkey welcomed the progress in addressing gender-based violence, including the ratification of regional instruments and the work by the Agency for Gender Equality, encouraging further efforts. It applauded the progress regarding corruption and human trafficking, noting related strategies and action plans, and the harmonization of national legislation with international standards. 38. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland noted the work of the Ombudsman institution, the development of a national plan for human rights and financial and political support for institutional and judicial bodies. It welcomed implementation of the National War Crimes Strategy, encouraging a focus on the prosecution of sexual violence cases. 39. The United States of America commended the elections, but urged investigation into reported irregularities. It expressed concern regarding alleged police ill-treatment of suspects, despite acceptance of the relevant recommendation. It noted the issues of child labour, particularly among Roma, and the right of refugees to return to pre-war homes. 40. Uruguay highlighted the ratification of OP-ICESCR and ICPPED. It welcomed the standing invitation to special procedures independent experts, which showed commitment to cooperation with the international human rights system. 41. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela noted efforts to improve the living conditions of Roma, particularly through education. It further noted the development of the normative framework for the prevention of gender-based violence, domestic violence and the protection of victims. 42. Viet Nam commended achievements in promoting and protecting human rights, including adoption of the guidelines for implementation of the World Programme for Human Rights Education in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It also noted improvements regarding institutional capacities, media freedom, education, social and health care, and employment rates. 43. Afghanistan commended efforts to implement recommendations accepted during the first cycle of the universal periodic review, particularly the ratification of CRPD and acceptance of its inquiry procedure. It welcomed the progress towards ensuring the rights of vulnerable and minority groups, noting the establishment of the Council of National Minorities and new laws and strategies. 44. Algeria welcomed the ratification of international instruments, including CRPD. It noted the creation of the Council for Children of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the adaptation of school curricula to meet the needs of minorities and improve integration. It welcomed the progress regarding gender equality, noting greater numbers of women in decision-making positions. 45. Angola welcomed the accession to international conventions and directives to improve living conditions for Roma children. It commended the work to harmonize gender equality legislation and ensure its application, in line with the the recommendation of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women. It noted efforts to improve the social position of persons with disabilities. 46. Argentina commended efforts to strengthen criminal proceedings in relation to war crimes, noting the adoption of the protocol on the treatment of victims and witnesses of war crimes, sexual assault and other criminal acts of gender-based violence. It expressed an interest in the information provided regarding the prohibition of discrimination. 47. Australia welcomed the successful general elections and the progress in combating systematic abuses by the security forces. It expressed concern about constitutional clauses restricting full political participation by all citizens; undue influence and lack of capacity in the justice system; and reports of intimidation against journalists. 48. Austria commended the ratification of international instruments, noting concerns about implementation of the national policy framework. It expressed concern regarding violence against women; lack of progress on the ruling on the case of Sejdi. and Finci; and Roma children outside the education system. It welcomed the ratification of CRPD and its Optional Protocol (OP-CRPD), urging further implementation. 49. Bahrain commended the method used to prepare the national report and noted efforts to implement recommendations accepted during the first cycle of the universal periodic review. It welcomed the reform of the criminal courts through the establishment of an efficient judicial system, guaranteeing the right to a fair trial, and related staff training programmes. 50. Belgium expressed regret that ethnic minorities had been prevented from standing for high-level State positions during recent elections; that right had only been granted to the three ethnic groups recognized in the constitution. It acknowledged local efforts to combat discrimination but noted ongoing issues, especially regarding returnees, disabled persons and Roma. 51. Brazil welcomed adoption of the guidelines for handling cases of violence against children in Bosnia and Herzegovina, calling for further measures in that regard and the promotion of access to education among vulnerable groups. It recognized the commitment to establishing the truth about persons missing during the war, urging further efforts. 52. Bulgaria welcomed the incorporation of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court into national legislation. It noted the concerns of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and the Human Rights Committee regarding hate speech and intolerance. It requested information on the progress made and the measures taken in that respect and the steps towards a legal framework against hate crime and discrimination based on ethnicity. 53. Canada requested information regarding progress towards ending ethnic segregation in schools and remaining obstacles. It welcomed the constructive approach to dialogue, acknowledging the challenges faced, but noted that segregation was not conducive to meeting the right to education; rather the education system should strengthen the country’s multicultural character. 54. Chile welcomed the initiatives to implement the recommendations from the first cycle, the ratification of international instruments, the promulgation of legislation and the strengthening of human rights institutions, particularly the implementation of plans of action regarding Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and demining. 55. China commended the implementation of the recommendations accepted during the first cycle of the universal periodic review, noting the measures regarding vulnerable groups, gender equality and domestic violence, and the strategies and policies to protect children’s rights. It welcomed the measures to ensure equal opportunities for persons with disabilities and combat discrimination against ethnic minorities including Roma. 56. Costa Rica noted efforts to align national legislation with international standards, urging further efforts to implement recommendations and court rulings from regional and international bodies. It commended the measures to protect children’s rights, but expressed concern regarding street children. It welcomed the measures regarding domestic violence and women’s rights, noting the Election Law. 57. Croatia welcomed efforts to implement the recommendations accepted during the first cycle of the universal periodic review and institutional and legislative changes regarding women’s rights. It commended the establishment of an independent national preventive mechanism against torture, aligned with the procedures of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (OP-CAT), and asked for information concerning a post-2014 action plan for children. 58. The Czech Republic warmly welcomed the members of the Bosnia and Herzegovina delegation and delivered recommendations. 59. Egypt commended institutional improvements, noting progress regarding children’s rights, the Ombudsman institution, the revised definition of torture, and measures against corruption. It welcomed the ratification of CRPD and asked whether a national action plan on human rights would add value, particularly in terms of national coordination. 60. Estonia commended the ratification of CRPD and OP-CRPD, welcoming an action plan for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). It expressed concern regarding the implementation of the ruling on Sejdi. and Finci and legislation regarding discrimination. It welcomed measures regarding Roma and the collection of data on discrimination, but noted failures regarding fundamental freedoms. 61. Finland commended the establishment of a national Council for Persons with Disabilities and efforts to eliminate differential treatment based on disability or geographical location, despite remaining challenges. It expressed concern regarding justice for victims of war crimes involving sexual violence and called for accelerated prosecutions and the ensuring of access to judicial and health services for victims. 62. France welcomed ratification of ICPPED. It asked what practical measures had been taken to increase the participation of women in civic and professional spheres and combat domestic violence. It also asked what action had been taken to combat impunity in cases of sexual violence committed during the war. 63. Germany welcomed the progress regarding human rights legislation, particularly steps to combat trafficking and address the situation of internally displaced persons. It encouraged further efforts to improve the human rights situation, in particular through adequately resourced implementation programmes in accordance with the rule of law. 64. Hungary commended efforts to ensure proper data collection, but reiterated concerns regarding the failure to fully implement previous recommendations, notably due to inadequate resources. It welcomed the progress on Roma inclusion, women’s rights, and gender equality. The situation of internally displaced persons and returnees remained a concern, despite a revised strategy in that regard. 65. The head of the delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina enumerated a number of the human rights issues which had been raised in the review. In relation to the return of refugees and internally displaced persons, he noted that 99 per cent of their housing had been returned to them since the end of the war, but problems in ensuring sustainability had contributed to a slow rate of return. Moreover, the living conditions for many of those that had returned were not yet satisfactory. The recent elections had still not resulted in the formation of a new Government, but the leaders had spoken of the priority of implementing the decision in the case of Sejdi. and Finci and improving cooperation within Bosnia and Herzegovina. He expressed the hope that it would finally be resolved and that the electoral law would be amended. 66. The Assistant Minister for Human Rights noted the communications which Bosnia and Herzegovina had recently received under the individual communications procedures of several treaties, and its standing invitation to the special procedures. She also noted a number of activities in the process, including the action plan for children and amendments to the Law on the Ombudsman, which would be submitted to parliament in early 2015. The latter would include the creation of a national preventive mechanism and an increase in the independence of the Ombudsman institution, in accordance with the Paris Principles. Technical amendments to the Anti-Discrimination Law would improve the procedures for protection from discrimination. She noted the many judgements under that law in the past years. 67. The Assistant Minister also noted the elimination in the majority of municipalities of the problem of birth registration of Roma children, with the assistance of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations Children’s Fund, and amendments to the legislation. In relation to street children and their social exclusion and exploitation, the Ministry had initiated research and created local teams and a number of day-care centres to support both the children and their families. The Bosnia and Herzegovina and entity Governments had adopted plans and activities, in cooperation with the NGOs, with the aim of ensuring support for victims of domestic violence. 68. A draft action plan for human rights and related directives in the field of human rights had been prepared and the Assistant Minister also noted that there was legislation in place to protect persons of various sexual orientations. The Ministry was seeking to improve practices in that area. Both the Council for Children and the Council for Persons with Disabilities had continued their work. 69. The delegation referred to the measures taken to implement CRPD since the last review, including the creation of the Association of Persons with Disabilities, which monitors policy at the State and entity levels. Both entities have laws to stimulate employment. Measures included financial incentives for employers and support for self-employment. All strategies related to employment took into account persons with disabilities as one of the target groups. Other policies, including those in education, also targeted that group. Bosnia and Herzegovina had made progress with regard to the rights of persons with disabilities, but would re-examine issues raised in the interactive dialogue. 70. The representative of the Ministry of Justice of Bosnia and Herzegovina noted the importance of the case of Sejdi. and Finci. Although the issue had not been resolved, Bosnia and Herzegovina had taken some measures for enforcing the decision of the court, including the creation of a commission, which was to prepare the draft constitutional and legislative amendments. Unfortunately, no agreement had been reached, but the work had continued and the working group for drafting the amendment to the Election Law had not yet submitted its report. 71. The delegation referred to the training of judges and prosecutors, which was carried out by the entity judicial and prosecutorial training centres and which covered a wide range of topics. Other projects covered the training of prison staff. 72. The head of the delegation regretted that there had not been time to provide verbal answers to all the questions raised in the interactive dialogue, but stressed that written answers on the achievements and plans of Bosnia and Herzegovina would be made available. 73. Iceland echoed concerns raised by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination regarding hate speech and discrimination on grounds of ethnicity and race. It commended the efforts to improve the situation of women in post-conflict situations, but expressed concern regarding the slow progress in prosecutions and poor conviction rates. It encouraged further efforts against human trafficking. 74. Indonesia welcomed the accession to core international instruments, good cooperation and the standing invitation to special procedures. It believed that a national action plan would enable better protection of human rights. It commended efforts to combat discrimination through policies to end segregation in schools, but noted remaining challenges. 75. The Islamic Republic of Iran welcomed the positive steps taken since the first cycle of the universal periodic review and expressed the hope that further measures would be taken to protect human rights and fundamental freedoms. It encouraged Bosnia and Herzegovina to accede to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure. 76. Ireland noted the national action plans on women’s and children’s rights and the standing invitation issued to special procedures. It expressed concern regarding the limited cooperation with treaty bodies; the fragmented implementation of policies; and the low rate of prosecution and conviction of alleged perpetrators of war crimes, especially as regards sexual violence. 77. Italy welcomed the accession of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the core international human rights instruments; the lack of use of the death penalty; and the steps to combat corruption, organized crime and human trafficking through related strategies and action plans. A multi-ethnic and multicultural education system was important. 78. Kuwait noted efforts in many sectors, especially regarding discrimination, poverty, children’s rights, minorities and gender equality. It commended the establishment of the Council for Children and efforts to promote the rights of persons with disabilities and the most vulnerable population groups. 79. Latvia welcomed the progress made and noted efforts towards removing landmines and the development of educational programmes for children and young people on the threat of landmines. However, there were several areas in which further steps could be taken to promote and protect human rights. 80. Libya welcomed the ratification of CRPD and OP-CRPD, and compliance with international commitments. It commended the establishment of the Council for Children to monitor implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) and the related action plan on children’s rights, as well as the reform of the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council. 81. Lithuania recognized the ratification of international and regional instruments on women’s rights and protecting children from sexual exploitation and abuse, but expressed concern regarding the implementation of international obligations and the need for justice for female victims of sexual and gender-based violence during the war. 82. Malaysia welcomed the improved social protection of vulnerable population groups, the harmonization of domestic violence legislation with international standards and efforts to combat human trafficking and for the protection of victims, as well as progress in poverty eradication, primary education and gender equality, as it had recommended previously. 83. Mauritania noted efforts to bolster democracy and the rule of law and cooperation with international mechanisms and civil society. It appreciated the legislation and practical measures to strengthen human rights institutions, the alignment of national legislation with international law and the accession to human rights conventions. 84. Mexico recognized the country’s cooperation with international mechanisms, including the ratification of ICPPED and CRPD, the submission of treaty body reports and the agreement to receive visits by various special procedures mandate holders. It commended the adoption of the revised strategy for the implementation of Annex VII of the Dayton Peace Agreement. 85. Montenegro welcomed the revised strategy for the implementation of Annex VII of the Dayton Peace Agreement and asked about the challenges facing its implementation. It welcomed the protection of children’s rights, asking about the results of the implementation of the guidelines for improving the situation of Roma children. 86. Morocco noted efforts to promote respect for religious and cultural diversity, including those aimed at political cohesion. It welcomed the independent High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council; efforts to harmonize legislation on discrimination; simplifying procedures for civil registration processes; and efforts to implement the World Programme for Human Rights Education. 87. The Netherlands encouraged judicial reform, equal rights for ethnic and religious groups and continuing harmonization with international standards. It expressed concern about discriminatory articles in the electoral legislation; weakened judicial institutions; deteriorating freedoms of the media and of assembly; and the low conviction rate of perpetrators of sexual violence. 88. Norway encouraged implementation of the Gender Equality Law. It noted that access to justice, particularly regarding war crimes, was difficult. Norway highlighted the importance of an integrated education system for reconciliation and peaceful coexistence; the participation of civil society; and the rights to freedom of assembly and non-discrimination for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender communities. 89. The Philippines recognized measures to prohibit discrimination, promote the inclusion of Roma, implement the World Programme for Human Rights Education and ensure the Ombudsman’s compliance with the Paris Principles. Noting ratification of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, it asked what procedural safeguards were being established to ensure access to effective redress. 90. Poland welcomed the efforts of Bosnia and Herzegovina to implement the recommendations accepted during the first cycle of the universal periodic review. It expressed concern regarding the human rights situation of persons belonging to national minorities, especially the Roma community. 91. Portugal welcomed the standing invitation issued to special procedures and the ratification of CRPD and ICPPED. It expressed concern regarding the domestic trafficking and exploitation of children, including begging, and asked for further information about those issues. 92. Qatar applauded efforts to promote children’s rights, including the Council for Children and related action plans. It commended the Council for Persons with Disabilities and the strategy and action plan for improvement of the social position of persons with disabilities. It encouraged the alignment of national legislation with international standards. 93. The Republic of Moldova noted the alignment of domestic legislation with international instruments and the adoption of sector-based strategies, asking whether a national action plan on human rights would be considered. It noted the commitment to human rights education for public officials and the priority given to combating domestic violence. 94. Romania noted the ratification of the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence and OP-ICESCR; adoption of the strategy to counter trafficking in human beings and its action plan; and measures to protect the rights of women and children. 95. The Russian Federation noted the country’s adherence to international instruments, improvements in national legislation and the implementation of multilateral agreements. However, challenges remained. Additionally, it noted that, as regards the situation of women, several indicators lagged behind European averages and that the Roma remained a marginalized group. 96. Saudi Arabia commended the cooperation with human rights mechanisms and efforts to implement international treaties. It noted the achievements in protecting the rights of the child and commended the establishment of the Council for Children. 97. Senegal noted the progress in combating poverty and discrimination against minorities and refugees; protecting the rights of children and persons with disabilities; and freedom of religion. It noted the institutional reform, which would address human rights violations; and the accession to regional instruments against the sexual exploitation and abuse of children and violence against women. 98. Serbia commended the steps towards safeguarding equality and minority rights, combating discrimination, reducing poverty and the sustainable return of refugees and internally displaced persons. It encouraged implementation of the ruling of the European Court of Human Rights in the case of Sejdi. and Finci and close cooperation with non-governmental organizations on human rights issues. It asked about specific activities to promote religious tolerance. 99. Sierra Leone commended the ratification of the core conventions and the submission of reports to treaty bodies. It noted human rights legislation and strategies, including on landmines and women’s rights, which should be implemented. It encouraged the protection of ethnic minorities and their political integration and the prosecution of enforced disappearances. 100. Slovakia encouraged compliance with international obligations and hoped the new Government would continue in that regard, including a review of electoral legislation. It encouraged steps towards inclusive education and awareness-raising of anti-discrimination legislation. Social assistance should address the needs of the most vulnerable groups. 101. Slovenia welcomed the standing invitation to the special procedures, ratification of CRPD and ICPPED, the establishment of the Council for Children and the protection of children’s rights. It encouraged a multi-ethnic learning environment and expressed concern regarding the lack of access to contraception and sexual and reproductive health education. 102. Spain recognized the efforts to improve the living conditions of persons with disabilities, legislative amendments to ensure hate crimes were investigated and the combating of discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. It noted that the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women had emphasized the need to achieve de facto equality for men and women in the labour market. It expressed concern at the retention of the death penalty in the criminal legislation of parts of the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina. 103. Sweden noted ongoing incidences of discrimination, threats and attacks against lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons and activists, despite previously accepted recommendations. Welcoming the explicit prohibition of corporal punishment of children in Republika Srpska, it expressed concern that a similar prohibition was not contained in legislation in the other administrative entities. 104. Switzerland referred to the efforts to implement the recommendations from the first cycle of the universal periodic review, in particular with regard to the situation of women and ongoing discrimination against them. It noted the ratification of the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse, albeit with limited implementation. It encouraged efforts to prosecute war crimes and combat impunity. 105. Thailand encouraged the country to continue to meet its international and regional obligations, and to complete the amendment of legislation to ensure that the unified Ombudsman institution complied with the Paris Principles and received sufficient resources. It reiterated the importance of a multi-ethnic education system and further strengthening of institutional capacity. 106. In conclusion, the head of delegation stated that the delegation had tried to answer the questions to the extent possible within the short time available. He summarized by stating that Bosnia and Herzegovina had made great progress and was encouraged to implement the recommendations received and also to continue implementation of its own plans. The delegation was grateful for the questions and recommendations received.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**  ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 107. The following recommendations will be examined by Bosnia and Herzegovina which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-eighth session of the Human Rights Council in March 2015.  107.1 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Portugal); 107.2 Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Slovakia); 107.3 Make necessary amendments to the constitution to ensure full integration of all national minorities (Norway); 107.4 Maintain and strengthen the harmonization process of the criminal legislation of the country with international standards (Senegal); 107.5 Take further measures in order to ensure the effective implementation of the international human rights instruments and to enhance the coordination between the different institutional levels involved (Italy); 107.6 Strengthen the capacities of the Ombudsman; intensify government support to this institution and take its recommendations into account (France); 107.7 Strengthen the capacity and improve the effectiveness of the national Ombudsman, ensuring full adherence to the Paris Principles (Germany); 107.8 Allocate adequate funding to strengthen the State level Human Rights Ombudsman and allow early implementation of Venice Commission recommendations (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 107.9 Provide the Ombudsman with the necessary financial resources, with a view to preserving its “A” status of accreditation (Morocco); 107.10 Provide budgetary and legal support to the Ombudsman for Human Rights in order to ensure its effectiveness and institutional independence (Poland); 107.11 Enhance the independence of the Ombudsman, in accordance with the Paris Principles, ensuring adequate funding for its proper functioning (Portugal); 107.12 Provide the Ombudsman institution with adequate financial and human resources so that it can fulfil its mandate effectively (Slovakia); 107.13 Expedite the establishment of its national preventive mechanism, in accordance with its obligations under OPCAT (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia); 107.14 Create a national mechanism to prevent torture in conformity with OPCAT (France); 107.15 Act on its previous commitment and establish a national preventative mechanism, as defined under OPCAT, and ensure the allocation of adequate resources for its functioning (Hungary); 107.16 Adopt a comprehensive national plan for human rights as a comprehensive document that includes effective measures for all human rights issues (Croatia); 107.17 Develop and implement a national action plan for human rights in order to framework a systematic approach to the promotion and protection of human rights (Indonesia); 107.18 Continue with further efforts to guarantee children’s rights, particularly in the field of social protection and education (Viet Nam); 107.19 After the implementation of the action plan for children in Bosnia and Herzegovina for the period 2002–2010, continue developing programmes for the protection of children, particularly on the fight against child exploitation for begging, their possible recruitment and use in armed conflicts, their protection in judicial processes, as well as their separation from adults in places of detention (Chile); 107.20 Further strengthen the rule of law and institutions to enforce social cohesion, tolerance and equality in order to comprehensively guarantee human rights for her people, in particular the vulnerable groups (Viet Nam); 107.21 Take measures to improve cooperation and coordination of activities among bodies at all levels which have a role to play in the promotion and protection of human rights (Ireland); 107.22 Implement transparent and inclusive mechanisms of public consultations with civil society organizations on all issues mentioned above (i.e. gender equality, minority rights, redressing wartime crimes, inclusive quality education for minorities and discrimination against LGBT persons) (Norway); 107.23 Improve the programmes for human rights training, in particular those designed for judges and law enforcement agents (Algeria); 107.24 Develop a national plan to combat discrimination, including through training for law enforcement agents and legal professionals and a campaign to raise public awareness (France); 107.25 Take all necessary measures to ensure the application of all laws and the training of officials in the rights of the child (Libya); 107.26 Continue its efforts to promote and protect the rights of vulnerable groups and provide them with more equal opportunities for advancement (China); 107.27 Draft and adopt a countrywide anti-discrimination strategy, in close cooperation with all relevant stakeholders, including with regard to sexual orientation and gender identity, and the Roma community (Germany); 107.28 Harmonize the Law on the Prohibition of Discrimination with the laws and provisions at entity, district and municipal levels and increase general awareness of the law (Estonia); 107.29 Bring all the national legislation into conformity with the 2009 Anti-Discrimination Law (France); 107.30 Implement the Anti-Discrimination Law by adopting an anti-discrimination strategy and action plan (Serbia); 107.31 Further efforts to foster intercultural dialogue, tolerance and understanding among the different communities and groups living in Bosnia and Herzegovina (Italy); 107.32 Ensure the effective implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and actively promote gender equality (Switzerland); 107.33 Fully implement without further delay the provisions on the Law on Gender Equality and include the prohibition of discrimination against women in the new constitution (Austria); 107.34 Implement the Law on Gender Equality and the gender action plan and ensure their adequate resourcing (Lithuania); 107.35 Continue increasing concrete measures within the framework of the 2011–2015 Strategy and its plan of action, for the promotion and protection of gender equality and women’s rights (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 107.36 Allocate adequate resources for the full effectiveness of the gender plan of action (2013–2017) (Spain); 107.37 Implement measures that ensure equality of rights and non- discrimination, especially on the grounds of gender, sexual orientation or gender identity (Uruguay); 107.38 Strengthen actions to ensure the effective implementation of legislation for protection against all forms of racial or ethnic discrimination, with a particular consideration to the creation of oversight mechanisms (Argentina); 107.39 Establish and strengthen programmes for combating prejudice and mechanisms for monitoring acts of ethnic-based discrimination and violence (Iceland); 107.40 Establish programmes for combating prejudice against ethnic minorities (Poland); 107.41 Enact legislation and norms prohibiting the creation of associations that promote and disseminate hate speech and racism, consistent with appropriate international instruments (Chile); 107.42 Combat hate speech and hate crime, including in the political sphere, and, to this end, collect and evaluate hate speech and hate crime data, and promote inter-ethnic and interreligious tolerance, in particular in the education system (Czech Republic); 107.43 Redouble its efforts to combat public manifestation of hate speech and intolerance (Indonesia); 107.44 Strengthen legislation to combat incitement to hate and discrimination on the grounds of ethnicity, culture, religion or nationality, particularly when it comes in political statements or from public officials (Mexico); 107.45 Investigate and prosecute incidents of hate speech (Sierra Leone); 107.46 Reform laws that contain discriminatory provisions, in particular against Roma people (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 107.47 Reinforce measures aimed at combating ethnic, racial and gender-based discrimination. Bearing in mind that Bosnia and Herzegovina is currently holding the chairmanship of the Decade for Roma Inclusion, undertake more measures to promote the inclusion of persons belonging to the Roma minority during the tenure of this initiative (Romania); 107.48 Continue its efforts to combat all forms of discrimination and religious fanaticism (Kuwait); 107.49 Step up measures to establish trust between religious communities within the country (Algeria); 107.50 Take measures to effectively combat discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity (France); 107.51 Build upon developments in Sarajevo Canton police regarding training, coordination and awareness-raising in tackling discrimination of LGBT persons and implement these practices throughout the judiciary and the police (Norway); 107.52 Develop a communications strategy to raise the awareness of society of the difficulties faced by groups of LGBTI persons and foster an environment of tolerance (Spain); 107.53 Publicly and unequivocally condemn any attack, verbal or physical, against LGBT groups and bring those responsible to justice (Sweden); 107.54 Proceed with the adaptation of legislation in all its national territory, in conformity with the provisions of the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, signed and ratified by the country (Spain); 107.55 Abolish the death penalty in Republika Srpska (France); 107.56 Repeal the death penalty provision in the constitution of Republika Srpska, so that the existing moratorium gives way to the full abolition of the death penalty (Italy); 107.57 Provide training to police officers about unacceptable conduct and adequately punish all cases of ill-treatment (United States of America); 107.58 Harmonize domestic legislation with international standards in relation to crimes of sexual violence during armed conflicts, continuing with investigations and ensuring the protection of witnesses and victims of these crimes (Uruguay); 107.59 Bring its legislation into line with the international standards related to the prosecution of war crimes of sexual violence (Finland); 107.60 Expedite the adoption of laws and programmes designed to ensure effective access to justice for all victims of wartime sexual violence, including adequate reparation (Iceland); 107.61 Thoroughly investigate acts of sexual violence committed during the conflict, with a view to holding perpetrators to account, ensure reparation and full reintegration into society of victims of wartime rape and other sexual violence, and take action to counter any manifestations of stigma and exclusion directed against them (Ireland); 107.62 The judiciary and other relevant authorities to provide justice, reparation and rehabilitation to the victims of wartime rape and sexual violence (Norway); 107.63 Amend the criminal code in order to ensure that the definition of war crimes of sexual violence is in accordance with international standards and to implement the National War Crimes Strategy (Lithuania); 107.64 Ensure adequate trained prosecutors, judges and staff in the justice systems of the Federation and of Republika Srpska, in order to make timely and efficient progress on war crime cases, including the sensitive handling of those dealing with sexual violence (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 107.65 Implement the recommendations of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, establishing a monitoring system and implementing legislation to combat domestic violence and other forms of violence against women (Uruguay); 107.66 Take measures to monitor the implementation of measures aimed at protecting victims of domestic violence (Bahrain); 107.67 Continue strengthening legislation aimed at protecting victims of domestic violence (Latvia); 107.68 Continue its positive measures in combatting domestic violence, including by ensuring effective investigation of domestic violence cases, bringing the perpetrators to justice and providing victims with the necessary assistance and protection (Malaysia); 107.69 Further ensure on its territory harmonized legislation on domestic violence and continue strengthening the referral mechanisms in order to provide protection to victims of domestic violence (Republic of Moldova); 107.70 Implement measures to reduce and eliminate child, early and forced marriage, including by addressing factors leading to high school drop-out rates among Roma children (Canada); 107.71 Step up its efforts to address the prevalence of violence against women by adopting a strategy for the implementation of the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (Hungary); 107.72 Revise and harmonize legislation on sexual and domestic violence with a view to penalizing all acts of violence committed against women (Sierra Leone); 107.73 Continue implementing its development plans, since development is an inalienable right, and support practical efforts to achieve development and to strengthen institutional capacities, focusing on the Government’s priorities which are education, social welfare and health services, and develop an effective national plan to combat human trafficking in cooperation with neighbouring countries (Saudi Arabia); 107.74 Ensure the explicit legal prohibition of corporal punishment of children in all settings (Croatia); 107.75 Enact legislation explicitly prohibiting all corporal punishment in all settings, including the home, in the District of Br.ko and in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (Sweden); 107.76 Prosecute the exploitation and trafficking of children, in particular of girls from ethnic minorities forced into early marriage (Sierra Leone); 107.77 Address serious problems associated with pursuing perpetrators of child pornography and other forms of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse of children and providing assistance for and protection of victims and witnesses (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 107.78 Make necessary amendments to the national legislation in order to bring it into line with international obligations and commitments for the protection of children and in particular for their protection against sexual abuses, as well as against trafficking of persons (Switzerland); 107.79 Raise public awareness of the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse (Lithuania); 107.80 Create a national system for information management to collect data on human trafficking, including human traffickers and identified victims (Turkey); 107.81 Amend laws to explicitly prohibit all forms of human trafficking, with a specific focus on child labour and forced begging (United States of America); 107.82 Strengthen the work on the fight against the trafficking of persons (Uruguay); 107.83 Continue efforts to combat the trafficking of persons, in particular of women and children, with the prosecution of perpetrators (Costa Rica); 107.84 Maintain its efforts in the area of combating trafficking in persons, especially women and children, including through a victim-oriented approach and an enhanced level of international and regional cooperation (Egypt); 107.85 Enhance efforts to establish and regularly update a countrywide database of human trafficking and enhance the support and assistance offered to the victims of trafficking (Italy); 107.86 Strengthen efforts aimed at combating and punishing trafficking in persons, particularly children and women, for labour and sexual exploitation (Mexico); 107.87 Continue efforts to implement the existing strategies and action plans to combat trafficking in human beings and to establish channels and mechanisms for international cooperation in this field (Qatar); 107.88 Implement the 2011–2014 action plan for children and the Strategy for combating violence against children 2012–2015, provide sufficient resources for the Strategy, enact a comprehensive national law on the rights of the child, ensure effective means of reporting violence against children and provide material and psychological assistance to victims of such violence (Saudi Arabia); 107.89 Adopt measures to address the problems of exploitation and domestic trafficking of children and ensure that all cases of trafficking are subject to proper investigation (Portugal); 107.90 Ensure the effective implementation of existing legislation, including the provision of protection and assistance to victims and timely prosecution and punishment of traffickers (Iceland); 107.91 Take further steps to improve the enforcement of anti-trafficking laws (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 107.92 Provide additional and sustained political and financial support to the justice system, including the Prosecutor’s Office (Australia); 107.93 Give priority to judicial system reform, especially to ensure equal access to justice, expeditious court proceedings and effective enforcement of court decisions, as well as to integrate human rights education into professional training programmes for judges and prosecutors (Thailand); 107.94 Ensure that all the courts and the prosecutors’ offices of various entities take adequate measures to support and protect witnesses, in order to avoid the transfer of files to these entities resulting in impunity, particularly in cases of sexual violence (Belgium); 107.95 The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina restrict the transfer of jurisdictions to the two entities, thus preventing further fragmentation of the judiciary in Bosnia and Herzegovina (Netherlands); 107.96 Eliminate from legislation the concept of preventive detention on the grounds of threats to public security or property and ensure due process in all detentions (Mexico); 107.97 Adopt a law on reparation and compensation for victims of torture during the war (France); 107.98 Continue efforts to fight impunity for serious violations of human rights committed during the armed conflict (Argentina); 107.99 Modify the criminal codes with a view to harmonizing them and bringing them into conformity with international criminal law obligations and commitments in the sphere of proceedings against perpetrators of international crimes, in particular war crimes involving sexual violence (Switzerland); 107.100 Harmonize the penal code applied in cases of war crimes, in addition to the review of verdicts where appropriate. In addition, it is necessary to define adequately the condition of victims of war and to provide necessary reparation (Chile); 107.101 Continue aligning the juvenile justice system with international standards (Latvia); 107.102 Continue implementing the plan to fight corruption (Bahrain); 107.103 Continue strengthening anti-corruption policies and ensure wider access to justice for every citizen, including through the provision of free legal assistance to the most vulnerable groups (Italy); 107.104 Set up clear regulatory frameworks for the activities of the security companies in order to ensure their legal accountability regarding human rights abuses (Iran (Islamic Republic of); 107.105 Provide, in accordance with its obligations under international human rights law, effective protection for the family as the fundamental and natural unit of society (Egypt); 107.106 Ensure that all children born in the country, who have not been registered, are provided with birth certificates and personal documents (Czech Republic); 107.107 Ensure that all children are registered at birth and provide unregistered children with personal documents (Estonia); 107.108 Take further steps to ensure registration of all births and provide identity documents to all persons whose birth was not registered (Romania); 107.109 Consider stepping up efforts to achieve free and universal birth registration by, among other measures, harmonizing State and local Government entities’ legislation pertaining to civil registration and eliminating remaining obstacles that prevent Roma women from registering births and obtaining birth certificates for their children (Philippines); 107.110 Develop and encourage tolerance between religious groups and fully guarantee the right to freedom of conscience and religion (Russian Federation); 107.111 Take the necessary measures to guarantee, in all circumstances, full respect for freedom of expression and  freedom of the press (France); 107.112 Take steps to further ensure freedom of speech and freedom of access to information both online and offline (Latvia); 107.113 Take immediate steps to ensure that allegations of threats and intimidation against journalists and the media are fully investigated (Australia); 107.114 Ensure the protection of journalists, media personnel and human rights defenders against any attacks, investigate and prosecute such attacks and bring those responsible to justice (Estonia); 107.115 Combat intimidation and pressure practices against journalists and human rights defenders (France); 107.116 Publicly condemn any attack or intimidation of journalists and human rights defenders, investigate such acts and bring perpetrators to justice (Lithuania); 107.117 Use international good practices as specific benchmarks for progress to improve the situation of the media community, as proposed by the media freedom representative of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, Dunja Mijatovi. (Lithuania); 107.118 Protect freedom of assembly and hold accountable any police officers involved1 (Lithuania); 107.119 Make the necessary constitutional changes to end discrimination against minorities in exercising their right to full political participation (Australia); 107.120 Review national legislation in order to ensure equal political participation for ethnic and religious minorities (Brazil); 107.121 Step up efforts to achieve an effective participation of minorities in political life (Costa Rica); 107.122 The new Government, once formed, ensures equal rights to all citizens, enabling political representation in a way that would reflect the multi-ethnic richness of the country (Slovenia); 107.123 The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the entity Governments join forces and amend the constitution in order to ensure the full political participation of all citizens at all levels of governance, regardless of their national and ethnic origin, and take further steps towards the implementation of the Sejdi. and Finci decision of the European Court of Human Rights, including by establishing an implementation timeline (Czech Republic); 107.124 Bring the constitution into line with the Sejdi. and Finci decision of the European Court of Human Rights (France); 107.125 Amend the national constitution and the Electoral Law and to bring them into line with the European Court of Human Rights ruling on Sejdi. and Finci (Germany); 107.126 The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina amend its constitution and the election law to remove discrimination on the basis of ethnicity in politics, in line with the European Court of Human Rights judgements in both Sejdi. and Finci v. Bosnia and Herzegovina and Azra Zorni. v. Bosnia and Herzegovina (Netherlands); 107.127 Implement the European Court of Human Rights judgement in the case of Sejdi. and Finci (Romania); 107.128 Take all necessary measures to remove discriminatory provisions from the constitution and the electoral law in line with the European Court of Human Rights judgement (Austria); 107.129 Amend without delay the constitution with a view to the elimination of discrimination on the basis of ethnicity in public political life and access to public service jobs in conformity with the judgement of the European Court of Human Rights (Belgium); 107.130 Take all necessary measures to raise the level of involvement of women in public and political life according to the quota stated in the relevant laws (Turkey); 107.131 Adopt additional measures to achieve gender equality, in policy formulation and decision-making at all levels of Government (Bahrain); 107.132 Fully ensure gender equality in labour recruitment and appointments to political posts (Russian Federation); 107.133 Include affirmative measures for women in employment policies and programmes at all governance levels and ensure women’s social protection and access to socioeconomic rights (Germany); 107.134 Ensure that all people in Bosnia Herzegovina including returnees, people with disabilities or Roma, have access to public services, including health care and education without discrimination (Belgium); 107.135 Develop as a matter of priority a multi-ethnic, inclusive and non-discriminatory common core curriculum, with all levels of Government ensuring that the content of school textbooks promotes and encourages tolerance among ethnic minority groups (Slovenia); 107.136 Strengthen programmes for the promotion of work, food and social assistance aimed at national minorities and other vulnerable sectors of the population in the fight against poverty and social inequality (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 107.137 Step up its measures in combating poverty, including by providing adequate funds for its social protection system and its national employment strategy to reduce unemployment (Malaysia); 107.138 Provide the necessary resources to address the extreme poverty and marginalization faced by Roma (Poland); 107.139 All levels of Government in Bosnia and Herzegovina consider providing equal access to sexual and reproductive health education and services, including affordable modern methods of contraception (Slovenia); 107.140 End school segregation on the basis of ethnicity, as well as review and revise school curriculums and textbooks with a view to promoting intercultural understanding and appreciation for the history and religion of all ethnic groups and national minorities (Canada); 107.141 The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the cantons introduce a truly inclusive multi-ethnic educational system and launch an efficient coordination mechanism on education (Czech Republic); 107.142 Take measures to make schools more inclusive, without any form of discrimination (Italy); 107.143 Ensure access to joint and inclusive quality education, with special attention towards the Roma minority, persons with disabilities and LGBT issues (Norway); 107.144 Take all necessary measures to put an end to the system known as “two schools under the same roof” and eliminate ethnic segregation in the school system (Uruguay); 107.145 The Government and local entities expeditiously eliminate segregation and ethnic divisions in schools and promote a multi-ethnic learning environment that will allow students to learn their own languages, cultures, histories and religions (Thailand); 107.146 Continue to raise awareness on the needs of the Roma population, in particular children, and establish an adequate system that provides for their social and educational inclusion, including by allocating sufficient resources (Austria); 107.147 Implement a single harmonized national school core curriculum, agreed upon by the representatives of the country’s ethnic groups and national minorities (Canada); 107.148 Bring the State legislation into line with CRPD (Angola); 107.149 Further improve the social status of persons with disabilities (Afghanistan); 107.150 Harmonize all laws and regulations in order to ensure equal treatment of persons with disabilities throughout the country, and to eliminate differential treatment of persons with disabilities based on a cause of disability (Finland); 107.151 Draft a single national action plan on the rights of persons with disabilities, with an associated budget and a clear time frame for its implementation (Austria); 107.152 Further its efforts in promoting the rights of persons with disabilities, including through considering a consolidated national action plan and designating an implementation national focal point, and providing the necessary resources to further ensure inclusive education and accessibility for persons with disabilities (Egypt); 107.153 Step up the process of elaboration of the action plan on the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities with a clearly defined time frame (Slovakia); 107.154 Continue consolidating the social protection programmes for the application of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 107.155 Adopt a national action plan to promote the rights of persons with disabilities, in line with CRPD, with special attention to the implementation of inclusive education and the promotion of labour market inclusion (Brazil); 107.156 Fully implement the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and in this regard designate a focal point as coordination mechanism based on appropriate consultation with DPOs (Germany); 107.157 Strengthen the application in all its territory of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, guaranteeing that the different measures initiated are in line with the approach defined in the Convention (Spain); 107.158 Continue efforts to eliminate all forms of discrimination against persons with disabilities, in line with best practices and international standards (Qatar); 107.159 Continue strengthening education measures and policies for the integration of Roma students in the education system, as well as strengthening literacy campaigns for the population (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 107.160 Create effective mechanisms for the social integration of Roma (Russian Federation); 107.161 Continue promoting social inclusion by strengthening the protection of ethnic minorities, in particular the Roma (Senegal); 107.162 Pursue vigorously the action plan for the Roma, including ensuring equal treatment and easy access to social services for them (Sierra Leone); 107.163 Ensure the inclusion and consultation of Roma while designing, implementing and evaluating policies, programmes or initiatives that might affect their rights (Austria); 107.164 Reinvigorate efforts to fulfil article VII of the Dayton Accords, guaranteeing refugees the right to return to their homes of origin (United States of America); 107.165 Consistently and rigorously implement the revised strategy for the implementation of Annex VII of the Dayton Peace Agreement and make all efforts to improve the living conditions of internally displaced persons and returnees (Czech Republic); 107.166 Ensure that IDPs and returnees can fully enjoy their rights relating to social protection, health care, education, housing, employment and physical security (Hungary); 107.167 Share the experience of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the field of multi-ethnic teaching of tolerance in schools (Morocco). 108. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole.  Annex [English only]   Composition of the delegation The delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina was headed by H.E. Mr. Miladin Dragi.evi., Deputy Minister for Human Rights and Refugees of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and composed of the following members: • H.E. Dr. Milo. Prica, Ambassador, Permanent Representative of Bosnia and. Herzegovina to the United Nations Office at Geneva; • Ms. Saliha .uderija, Assistant Minister for Human Rights of Bosnia and Herzegovina; • Ms. Dra.enka Mali.begovi., Assistant Minister for Civil Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina; • Mr. .eljko Bogut, Secretary of the Ministry of Justice of Bosnia and Herzegovina; • Mr. Mario .uragi., Head of the Regional Representative Office of Republika Srpska in Brussels; • Mr. Veljko .urkovi., Inspector in the Ministry of Security of Bosnia and Herzegovina; • Ms. Rajko Kli.kovi., Head of Department in the Ministry of Labour of Republika Srpska; • Mr. Nemanja Pandurevi., Head of Cabinet of the Deputy Minister for Human Rights and Refugees of Bosnia and Herzegovina; • Mr. Jasenko Muharemagi., Advisor in the Cabinet of the Prime Minister of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina; • Mr. Cvijetin Nikoli., Advisor in the Cabinet of the Mayor of Br.ko District; • Ms. Sanela Lali., Expert in the Ministry of Justice of Bosnia and Herzegovina; • Ms. Sne.ana Vi.nji., First Secretary in the Permanent Mission of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the United Nations Office at Geneva; • Ms. Roksanda Mi.i., Interpreter; • Ms. Amira Sadikovi., Interpreter.     