Distr.: General 7 July 2014 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-seventh session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Brunei Darussalam * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.14-07530  (E) *1407530* 
Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–112 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–24 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 25–112 6 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 113–114 13  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 25 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its nineteenth session from 28 April to 9 May 2014. The review of Brunei Darussalam was held at the 9th meeting on 2 May 2014. The delegation of Brunei Darussalam was headed by Pehin Dato Lim Jock Seng, Second Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade. At its 14th meeting held on 6 May 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on Brunei Darussalam. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Brunei Darussalam: Morocco, Romania and Saudi Arabia. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Brunei Darussalam: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/19/BRN/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/19/BRN/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/19/BRN/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, the Czech Republic, Germany, Liechtenstein, Mexico, the Netherlands, Slovenia, Spain, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America was transmitted to Brunei Darussalam through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR). I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation of Brunei Darussalam was honoured to once again engage with the Working Group for the second cycle of the UPR. It referred to its report which highlighted Brunei Darussalam’s ongoing work to improve the welfare of its people and to protecting the rights of vulnerable groups, such as women, children, persons with disabilities and the elderly. The report also included its responses to the 33 recommendations made during the first cycle. 6. The delegation reiterated that the core policy of His Majesty’s Government was to be people-centred in all aspects, in terms of material as well as spiritual needs. The people of Brunei Darussalam enjoyed living in a peaceful and harmonious environment, the hallmark of the 30 years of its full independence, which would continue as the State strived to realize by 2035, its National Vision of being a nation with highly educated, skilled and successful citizens, who will attain a high quality of life in a dynamic and sustainable economy. 7. His Majesty’s deep dedication towards the welfare of his people ensured the provision of a first-class education system; quality health services, as well as adequate housing. Citizens and residents alike continued to enjoy the generous subsidies granted by the Government for several essential commodities such as fuel, gas, water, rice and sugar. 8. Education remained one of the top priorities, accounting for nearly 13 per cent of the national budget. The provision of free, quality education from early childhood to tertiary-level, equally accessible to both boys and girls, was further enhanced. Scholarships to study in the country and abroad were granted to eligible students. Brunei Darussalam had attained one of the highest literacy rates in the region. Technical and vocational qualification opportunities were provided for its people to acquire the necessary skills to increase their competitiveness and improve their self-development. Its efforts were in line with the Education for All goals of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), and the country ranked 34 out of 127 countries in the organization’s most recent development index. Brunei Darussalam had also worked with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and UNESCO to complement its legislation on the nine-year compulsory education currently in place through enhancing the Early Childhood Care and Education Programme. 9. The delegation highlighted that as Brunei Darussalam was a small nation, the health of its people was vital to its development. His Majesty’s Government therefore placed great importance on the provision of a comprehensive health care system. Free medical health care was provided for citizens. The delegation was proud that Brunei Darussalam had achieved many of the targets set by the World Health Organization. 10. The Government had adopted an environmental policy direction and strategies in implementing its National Development Plan for a healthy environment. The delegation was pleased that one of the country’s most valuable assets was its clean air. Brunei Darussalam was home to well-preserved, pristine rainforests with a rich biodiversity, its national pride for future generations. Together with the international community, it shared the responsibility to save the Earth from global warming. It also cooperated with Malaysia and Indonesia in the Heart of Borneo project, whereby about 58 per cent of the island’s land mass has been protected in an effort to preserving the planet. 11. The delegation stated that His Majesty’s strong commitment to his people was apparent in good times and in times of need. His Majesty’s continuous concern for the well.being of his people was demonstrated during the flash floods in some parts of the country, in early 2014, when His Majesty personally visited the affected areas to ensure that the authorities had responded immediately and efficiently to secure the safety of those concerned. Also, a considerable amount of resources had been allocated to relief and repair efforts and a budget of about US$55 million had been earmarked for flood mitigation measures. 12. Those were just some of the efforts Brunei Darussalam had made in promoting and protecting the bigger aspects of human rights, in line with the Millennium Development Goals. It had achieved almost all of the targets set, especially in eradicating extreme poverty. The country ranked 30 out of 187 countries in the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Human Development Report 2013. It would continue to strive towards accelerating development and looked forward to supporting the post-2015 development agenda. 13. The delegation highlighted the efforts of His Majesty’s Government in protecting vulnerable groups in the country. A number of measures had been put in place, such as introducing new legislation, amending existing ones and setting up special committees to further ensure their rights, included the adoption of the Children and Young Persons Act, which led to the establishment in 2010 of a juvenile justice system aimed at ensuring appropriate judicial procedures for young offenders. 14. Support was provided for less privileged children through benefits, proper care and guidance. Several welfare programmes had been initiated, including the provision of shelter homes; an education allowance; as well as various funds for orphans, such as the Crown Prince Fund for Orphans. 15. Women constituted over half of the country’s workforce and had actively contributed to the development of the country as well as the maintenance of peace and security. An increasing number of women held professional posts in various fields, and many of them had attained high-level positions in the public and private sectors, such as Ambassador-at-Large, Attorney General, Deputy Minister, members of the Legislative Council, senior officials in Ministries and entrepreneurs, to name but a few. The Government’s commitment to promoting gender equality was clearly evident in its national policies that were applicable to all community sectors. As a result, it had reached a remarkable literacy rate of over 95 per cent for girls. In 2013, the Global Gender Gap Report of the World Economic Forum  placed Brunei Darussalam in 6th place in terms of estimated earned income; 12th place in terms of enrolment in tertiary education; and 17th place for wage equality. The rights of women were further protected through legislation such as the Islamic Family Law Act and the Married Women Act. 16. The welfare of the elderly population continued to be safeguarded through strong family and cultural values. In addition to care by their families, the elderly also benefitted from a significant social safety net in the form of a monthly pension for all citizens and permanent residents who had reached the age of 60. This pension was non-contributory and non-means-tested. 17. The Government continued to protect the rights of persons with disabilities through various efforts, including the provision of monthly allowances, which were also supported and complemented by various non-governmental organizations (NGOs) concerned with the welfare of persons with specific disabilities. 18. Brunei Darussalam, as a monarchy and an Islamic State, continued to uphold the institution of the family as the dominant aspect of its culture. The concept of the large extended family had long been established and constituted the social safety net. In 2012, the first Sunday in May was declared National Family Day to commemorate the importance of the family unit. Brunei Darussalam was a close-knit society that was distinctly communal and cohesive. Festive occasions such as Eid, Chinese New Year and Christmas were celebrated by all members of the diverse community. Relatives and friends exchanged visits, good wishes and gifts, which encouraged tolerance among the ethnic and religious groups. 19. Religious tolerance and understanding were very important. Brunei Darussalam became a member of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations Group of Friends in 2012 and participated in several inter-faith dialogues. 20. Under the Constitution, Islam was the official religion of Brunei Darussalam, and its values and teachings continued to be the way of life for its people. As such, the activities of the society revolved around its Malay culture and Islamic faith. Non-Muslims may practise their religions in peace and harmony, as provided for in the Constitution. Sharia law had been in existence in Brunei Darussalam since the reign of the first monarch in the 14th century. The objective of sharia law was to create a society where religion, life, intellect, property and lineage were preserved and protected. As an Islamic nation with a strong sense of responsibility, in 2013, Brunei Darussalam introduced the Sharia Penal Code Order, which would be applied in parallel with the existing civil law. The Order would come into effect in phases. 21. Brunei Darussalam held the chairmanship of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in 2013, with the theme “Our People, Our Future Together”, and initiated the implementation of the 2012 ASEAN Human Rights Declaration, including the publication of a book on the Declaration and its translation into all the ASEAN languages. Furthermore, the 23rd ASEAN Summit, held in October 2013, adopted the ASEAN Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women and Children and the Declaration on Strengthening Social Protection. Brunei Darussalam continued to support the work of the relevant ASEAN bodies related to human rights. The progress made by ASEAN over the past year demonstrated Brunei Darussalam’s commitment to working together with its neighbours and partners, especially in the field of human rights. 22. The delegation reaffirmed Brunei Darussalam’s commitment to its international obligations and indicated that Brunei Darussalam would be ratifying the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) in the near future. In 2012, Brunei Darussalam submitted its combined initial and second periodic reports to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and its combined second and third periodic reports to the Committee on the Rights of the Child in 2013. The delegation stated that Brunei intended to withdraw its reservations to Article 20, paragraphs 1 and 2, of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) relating to the protection of a child without a family, and Article 21 (a) on adoption, and that it was working towards ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict (OP-CRC-AC). Furthermore, in support of global efforts towards abolishing child labour and as recommended during the first UPR cycle, in 2011, it ratified the International Labour Organization (ILO) Minimum Age Convention (No. 138). 23. Brunei Darussalam appreciated the values of peaceful co-existence, mutual respect and cooperation and would continue to welcome technical assistance from international partners and, at the same time, play its part in providing assistance, including financial support, capacity-building and technical cooperation, through various means, such as the Commonwealth Fund for Technical Co-operation, the Initiative for ASEAN Integration and the Enrichment Projects for ASEAN. Brunei Darussalam offered scholarships to foreign students to pursue higher-level education in its various academic institutions; to date, nearly 400 scholarships had been awarded to students from over 63 countries. It also actively contributed to the initiatives of several United Nations bodies such as World Health Organization (WHO), UNICEF, UN-Women and United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA). Brunei would continue to lend its support in the best way it could. 24. The delegation further highlighted that, being a small State of 400,000 people, Brunei Darussalam had very limited human resources and would appreciate assistance with capacity-building from international organizations. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 25. During the interactive dialogue, 78 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue can be found in section II of the present report. 26. The Syrian Arab Republic commended the importance attached in national programmes to preservation of the family as a core unit of society as well as action in support of the advancement of women, as evidenced by their election to the Legislative Council. 27. Thailand commended Brunei Darussalam’s progress towards ratification of CRPD and the provision of equal education opportunities. It acknowledged women’s representation in the Legislative Council and the Government’s promotion of women’s rights through the ASEAN Committee on Women and gender equality programmes. 28. Timor-Leste took note of the positive steps undertaken by Brunei Darussalam to implement the recommendations of the first UPR. It commended progress made in education, health and women’s rights. 29. Tunisia commended Brunei Darussalam for combating discrimination and violence against women and adopting actions plans on women, persons with disabilities and child protection. It encouraged Brunei Darussalam to modify the law on nationality to ensure gender equality and to provide a climate propitious to the activities of human rights defenders, journalists and civil society. 30. Turkey commended Brunei Darussalam’s participation in regional and global human rights work and its transparent approach to technical cooperation in its human rights and development endeavours.  31. Ukraine noted with appreciation Brunei Darussalam’s efforts to protect cultural rights through the ratification of UNESCO conventions. Ukraine asked how the Sharia Penal Code would be applied to non-Muslims. 32. The United Arab Emirates welcomed the establishment of the Heads of Specialist Trafficking Unit and the Human Trafficking Investigation Unit. It commended the increased inter-agency capacity-building coordination and the appeals for technical assistance in the fight against trafficking. 33. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland welcomed Brunei Darussalam’s progress on social and economic rights and its Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) achievements. It urged the Government to suspend the state of emergency and to ensure that the Sharia Penal Code did not violate rights to freedom of religion. 34. The United States of America acknowledged Brunei Darussalam’s commitment to the rights of children and gender equality. It was concerned that the 2013 Sharia Penal Code would undermine Brunei Darussalam’s international human rights commitments; trade unions could be refused registration; and migrant workers remained vulnerable to forced labour. 35. Uruguay welcomed Brunei Darussalam’s MDG achievements, particularly in education, health and infant mortality. It noted the introduction of legislation to prevent crime and promote human rights.  36. Uzbekistan commended measures taken by Brunei Darussalam to implement the recommendations from the first UPR cycle and the adoption of the National Development Plan to strengthen the family, women’s and children’s rights and juvenile justice. 37. Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) noted the progress made by Brunei Darussalam in implementing the UPR recommendations; its ratification of ILO Convention No. 138 to abolish child labour; the introduction of the National Development Plan; its MDG achievements; and improvements in social protection and equality. 38. Viet Nam appreciated the adoption of the Brunei Vision 2035, which provided a foundation for the protection and promotion of human rights; Brunei Darussalam’s contribution to regional and international human rights cooperation; its implementation of the UPR recommendations on women’s and children’s rights, education and health care.  39. Yemen commended Brunei Darussalam’s steady progress towards achievement of the MDGs through the implementation of social safety net programmes; provision of equal educational opportunities; and safeguarding of the environment and natural resources. 40. Afghanistan believed that children should be involved in development and noted, with satisfaction, Brunei Darussalam’s public-awareness and probation campaigns and community services for child offenders. It commended the withdrawal of reservations to the CRC. 41. Albania welcomed Brunei Darussalam’s legislation on the rights of women and children, the family, employment and education, and commended the implementation of the plan of action on women and the family, which covered children’s rights. 42. Algeria welcomed the importance accorded by Brunei Darussalam to social and family issues and commended the progress made in economic, social and cultural rights. It noted the legislative reforms introduced to strengthen human rights for children and married women and the 2009 decree on employment.  43. Argentina commended Brunei Darussalam for its 10th National Development Plan (2012–2017). 44. Armenia noted positive changes in Brunei Darussalam’s protection of human rights, promotion of education, strengthening of services through building schools and infrastructure, and protection of vulnerable women through employment and capacity-building. It noted that Brunei Darussalam had not ratified a number of human rights instruments. 45. Australia commended Brunei Darussalam for its commitment to health care and education. It was concerned about the impact of the Sharia Penal Code on religious freedom, the status of women, treatment of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) persons and resumption of the death penalty. 46. Azerbaijan welcomed Brunei Darussalam’s follow-up to recommendations from the previous UPR and its progress in health and education. It appreciated the institutional reform that addressed poverty, crime, the family, women and persons with disabilities and its progress in anti-trafficking law enforcement. 47. Bahrain welcomed the adoption of the National Development Plan (2012–2017) and commended the provision of free medical and health care to all citizens, including vaccination programmes and antenatal screenings for children and women. 48. Bangladesh noted Brunei Darussalam’s progress in education, health care, housing and human development and its positive impact on human rights. It noted that Brunei Darussalam had an impressive record in promoting the institution of the family, but that it was not party to some core human rights treaties.  49. Belarus commended the withdrawal of Brunei Darussalam’s reservations to the CRC and the amendments to the Penal Code aimed at curbing commercial sexual exploitation of children and enabling the prosecution of a wider range of sexual offences. 50. Spain noted Brunei Darussalam’s introduction of legislation to combat gender-based violence, but was concerned by the criminalization of same-sex sexual relations.  It noted gaps in the legislation to combat prostitution of minors and that the Islamic Penal Code was incompatible with international human rights legislation. 51. Bhutan congratulated Brunei Darussalam for its implementation of recommendations from the previous UPR cycle and the efforts made to promote human rights and to include women in decision-making. 52. Brazil welcomed Brunei Darussalam’s awareness-raising campaigns against child abuse and the establishment of an action team on child protection. However, its progress in achieving the Millennium Development Goals had not been matched by improvements in civil and political rights. 53. Burkina Faso noted progress made since the first UPR cycle. It encouraged Brunei Darussalam to continue with its implementation of the 10th National Development Plan 2012–2017; its collaboration with human rights NGOs; the formulation of laws and the implementation of programmes. 54. Cambodia commended Brunei Darussalam’s commitment to strengthening democracy and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, especially the rights of children and the rights to education, health care and economic opportunities. 55. Canada asked how Brunei Darussalam would meet its international human rights obligations which were in conflict with the Sharia Penal Code, particularly on women’s rights. It welcomed steps to prevent human trafficking and child exploitation and improve law enforcement. 56. Chad noted efforts to protect social, economic and cultural rights. It commended the adoption of the 10th National Development Plan 2012–2017 and noted the progress made towards attaining the MDGs and development of legislation on children’s rights. 57. China commended efforts made to implement the 10th National Development Plan and the focus on improving education, health care and women’s and children’s rights protection. It appreciated progress in combating human trafficking and the commitments to promoting multireligious and multicultural harmony. 58. Costa Rica commended Brunei Darussalam’s cooperation with human rights mechanisms, the ratification of international instruments and improved access to and quality of education and health care. It expressed concern regarding the use of corporal punishment against children, stating that it should stop. 59. Cuba acknowledged the steps to protect citizens’ economic, social and cultural rights and eliminate poverty and illiteracy. It welcomed free education and health services, and efforts to protect the rights of persons with disabilities. 60. The Czech Republic noted deficiencies in the laws and practices pertaining to the freedom of expression and the freedom of the press. 61. Djibouti commended Brunei Darussalam on the quality of its national report, which reflected its commitment to human rights. 62. Egypt invited Brunei Darussalam to share its views on best practices and major challenges relating to the implementation of integrated pro-family policies and measures to protect and support the family as the fundamental unit of society. 63. France expressed serious concern regarding the adoption of the Sharia Penal Code Order and the consequences that it may have on the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. 64. Germany acknowledged the success of Brunei Darussalam in advancing the social and economic development of the country. 65. Ghana welcomed Brunei Darussalam’s commitment to the UPR process and applauded the country’s concern for the rights of older persons. 66. India commended the implementation of the 10th National Development Plan 2012.2017, attainment of the MDGs and progress towards universal health and education. It welcomed efforts to protect the rights of vulnerable groups and encouraged Brunei Darussalam to review the changes to its criminal law which impacted the freedom of religious minorities. 67. Indonesia commended the Brunei Vision 2035, which demonstrated its commitment to the development of its citizens and to human rights, both regionally and internationally. It recognized the efforts to promote and protect the rights of persons with disabilities. 68. Iraq noted the Government’s achievements in the areas of education and health care, and the enhancement of the well-being of children and older persons. 69. Ireland expressed concern at the amendments to the Penal Code which prescribed the death penalty for a wide range of offences. While welcoming the achievement of high office by women, it stressed the need for improvements in the protection of women’s rights. 70. Iran (Islamic Republic of) highlighted the efforts by Brunei Darussalam to improve the situation of women and children through the establishment of the Special Committee and the Plan of Action on Family Institution and Women. 71. Italy noted strengthened protection of children from sexual exploitation, but expressed concern regarding the Sharia Penal Code Order and restrictions on freedom of expression. It noted that Brunei Darussalam had not yet acceded to several international instruments. 72. Japan thanked Brunei Darussalam for explaining its position on sharia law. It commended measures taken towards acceding to treaties it had not yet ratified; the appointment of women to government posts; the submission of reports to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and improved social security for women during maternity. 73. Jordan highly appreciated the enactment of the Children and Young Persons Act, the adoption of the Workplace Safety and Health Order and the establishment of the Special Committee on Family Institution and Women. 74. Kazakhstan acknowledged the measures to improve human rights, including the provision of housing, health care and education. It called for universal education, especially for vulnerable social groups and noted the efforts to secure freedom of religion. 75. Kuwait commended the methodical approach adopted by Brunei Darussalam in preparing its report, and its commitment to strengthening human rights. 76. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic noted Brunei Darussalam’s accession to international conventions and its development of national instruments. It welcomed the progress made towards achieving the MDGs and encouraged safeguarding the rights of children, women, the elderly and persons with disabilities, and improving access to health care and education. 77. Morocco welcomed the adoption of the Children and Young Persons Act, the amendment of the Penal Code to further protect the young and vulnerable from sexual exploitation, and the adoption of legal provisions to protect migrant workers. 78. Malaysia appreciated the progress made since the first UPR and congratulated the country on attaining the MDGs and on progress made regarding the rights of women, children and persons with disabilities through the implementation of legislation. 79. Maldives commended Brunei Darussalam’s engagement in the UPR process, its commitment to improving its citizens’ living conditions and the progress made towards attaining the MDGs. It encouraged the international community to assist the country in overcoming challenges. 80. Mauritania noted the emphasis placed on promoting human rights by ensuring basic standards of health care, education, food, housing and welfare. It commended the holding of an Awareness Forum on the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) and the signing of CRPD. 81. Mexico noted that the ratification of the conventions on statelessness would support efforts to regularize the situation of stateless persons. It called on Brunei Darussalam to extend invitations to all United Nations specialized agencies to visit the country. 82. Montenegro enquired about what accounted for the lack of cooperation with United Nations treaty bodies and whether there were plans to ratify core international instruments and improve cooperation. It requested information on the UNESCO recommendation regarding freedom of expression. 83. Libya noted the establishment of the Special Committee on Family Institution and Women and the Special Committee on Persons with Disabilities and the Elderly. It commended action to improve education and health care and to promote awareness of human rights. 84. Myanmar thanked Brunei Darussalam for its presentation. It welcomed its active participation in the UPR process and in other regional mechanisms for the promotion and protection of human rights. 85. The Netherlands commended the country for ensuring access to education and health care. It was concerned by legal provisions criminalizing sexual relations between consenting adults and the proposed introduction of the death penalty in the Penal Code. 86. Nicaragua commended legislative reforms to protect human rights, progress regarding protection of children and women and efforts to create greater opportunities for its citizens through the implementation of the National Development Plan.  87. Oman commended Brunei Darussalam’s MDG achievements, particularly with regard to women, children and persons with disabilities. It noted that a Human Resource Development Fund had been established to provide young people with training opportunities. 88. Pakistan commended the consultative process adopted to prepare the report, the establishment of the inter-agency consultative mechanism and the inclusion of women in the Legislative Council. It appreciated the country’s commitment to human rights.  89. The Philippines commended Brunei Darussalam on promoting education for all; strengthening legislation on human trafficking; withdrawing reservations to CRC; making progress towards ratification of OP-CRC-AC and guaranteeing migrant rights under labour law. 90. Portugal welcomed efforts to enhance human rights, particularly through the inter.agency consultative mechanism. It asked what measures were envisaged to prevent children’s statelessness, since under the Brunei Nationality Act, mothers could not confer their nationality to their children. 91. Oman commended Brunei Darussalam’s MDG achievements, particularly on behalf of women, children and persons with disabilities. It noted that a Human Resource Development Fund had been established to provide young people with training opportunities. 92. The Republic of Korea appreciated the measures to combat human trafficking and the steps taken to naturalize stateless persons. It felt that ratification of key international instruments would improve the human rights situation and that civil society organizations should be promoted. 93. Romania welcomed the progress made since the previous UPR cycle. It commended the progress in ensuring the rights to education, health and social security. 94. The Russian Federation highlighted the importance of gender equality and the promotion of women’s rights for national development, in line with the Brunei Vision 2035. It noted the establishment of the Brunei Darussalam AIDS Council. 95. Saudi Arabia commended the establishment of Special Committees on poverty, crime prevention, women, older people and persons with disabilities, and noted that women were members of the Legislative Council. It welcomed the adoption of the Sharia Penal Code Order and the Children and Young Persons Act. 96. Sierra Leone welcomed the steps taken towards attaining the MDGs. It asked whether non-Muslims would be accountable under the new Sharia Penal Code provisions and whether the country had met its gross national income target for overseas development assistance. 97. Singapore noted the progress made in promoting access to health care and education for all through the implementation of the National Development Plan 2012-2017. It lauded the focus on social harmony in the Brunei Vision 2035 initiative. 98. Slovenia commended the progress made towards attaining the MDGs. It welcomed the withdrawal of reservations to CRC, but was concerned about the non-ratification of several core international instruments and restrictions on freedom of expression. 99. Belgium expressed concerns regarding child protection and freedom of expression. It was deeply concerned about the enactment of the Sharia Penal Code providing for capital and corporal punishment for a significant number of offences.  100. Sri Lanka noted the prioritization of and budgetary allocation to education. It welcomed action regarding children’s and young people’s rights, including the adoption of the Children and Young Persons Act and the Human Resource Development Fund. 101. The State of Palestine welcomed the efforts to implement the recommendations of the previous UPR and to develop human capital through education. It commended the efforts to improve health care, but expressed concern about the shortage of qualified health practitioners. 102. Sudan commended the measures taken to promote the rights of women, children, persons with disabilities and older persons. In particular, it praised the establishment of the Special Committee on Family Institution and Women. 103. Sweden noted the restrictions on fundamental freedoms and exploitation of foreign workers. It also noted that the Sharia Penal Code stipulated the death penalty for a broad range of offences, including adultery and blasphemy, thus contravening international law. 104. The delegation of Brunei Darussalam expressed its appreciation to the Secretariat and the Bureau for their efforts in ensuring the success of the UPR session, and thanked all the distinguished delegates for their statements. The delegation took note of their comments and recommendations. 105. The delegation reiterated the focus of His Majesty’s Government on the welfare of its people in addressing some of the core basic issues of human rights in terms of the rights to education, health, food and shelter. It regarded those rights as the four basic pillars of human rights. 106. It re-emphasized free education for all Bruneians, from primary to tertiary levels, stating that the Government also offered scholarships for eligible students to continue their studies abroad. With a population of 400,000, about 2,000 to 3,000 students were pursuing their tertiary education in the United Kingdom. For those who could not meet the academic requirement, technical education was also available. 107. It stated that free health services were provided for everyone, and for those who were working in the country, a very minimum charge was involved. In addition to that, patients were also sent abroad to Singapore, Malaysia, the United Kingdom, Australia, the United States of America for specialized health-care treatment. 108. The delegation referred to its opening statement, in which it had mentioned the comprehensive provision of shelter to the people. It also highlighted the extended family system as a kind of social safety net for the people, and stated that  a non-contributory pension was provided by the Government as an additional safety net. Furthermore, other social, cultural and spiritual aspects were catered for. 109. With regard to multilateral cooperation on human rights, the delegation stated that Brunei Darussalam worked very closely with its regional partners and international organizations. With a population of 400,000 people, the country had very limited human resources. It needed capacity-building and would appreciate any assistance offered by international organizations. 110. Regarding Portugal’s question about the Nationality Act, the delegation responded by referring to its legislation. The Brunei Nationality Act (Cap. 15) allows for either a Bruneian father or a Bruneian mother to obtain nationality for a child, in accordance with sections 4 and 6 respectively. Section 4 of the Brunei Nationality Act (Cap. 15) spells out the categories of persons who can acquire nationality by operation of law. Section 6 provides for the acquisition of nationality for a minor by way of registration, upon application by the parent or guardian who is a Brunei national. Therefore, pursuant to section 6 of the Act, children of Bruneian women married to foreign nationals may be accorded Brunei nationality upon application. 111. Regarding Mexico’s call that Brunei Darussalam invite United Nations agencies to visit the country, the delegation responded that in addition to the said agencies, it welcomed all present to visit the country and appreciate the green and peaceful environment, as well as meet the friendly people of Brunei Darussalam. 112. The delegation expressed its pleasure to have participated in the second cycle of the UPR, and looked forward to working with the members of the troika, namely Morocco, Romania and Saudi Arabia and the Secretariat in drafting the report. It said that it would continue to work together with fellow member States, international organizations and NGOs. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations.. 113. The following recommendations will be examined by Brunei Darussalam, which will respond in due course, but no later than the twenty-seventh session of the Human Rights Council in September 2014: 113.1 Ratify the other international instruments on human rights that the country is not yet a party to (Argentina); 113.2 Further fulfil the international obligations as well as join new human rights international instruments (Kazakhstan); 113.3 Ratify or accede to all the core United Nations human rights instruments listed in the relevant compilation of OHCHR of 12 February 2014, relating to political rights, civil rights, economic and social rights, elimination of racial discrimination, torture, rights of women and genocide (Ghana); 113.4 Accede to all core international human rights instruments, in particular to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Germany); 113.5 Ratify ICCPR and ICESCR (Algeria); ** Conclusions and/or recommendations have not been edited. 113.6 Sign and ratify the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and its Optional Protocol (Spain); 113.7 Continue to consider the potential for its accession to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, which are the most fundamental human rights conventions (Japan); 113.8 Take steps in order to sign and ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Romania); 113.9 Consider acceding to ICESCR and ICRMW (Egypt); 113.10 Ratify ICCPR, ICESCR, CERD, CAT and the Rome Statute (Tunisia); 113.11 Accede to ICCPR, ICESCR, CAT, and the Rome Statute of the ICC (Australia); 113.12 Ratify or accede to CAT, OP-CAT, ICCPR, and lift its broad reservations to CEDAW and CRC (Czech Republic); 113.13 Ratify ICCPR, ICESCR and its Second Optional Protocol, and CAT (Djibouti); 113.14 Ratify ICCPR, ICESCR, CERD and CAT and withdraw reservations to CEDAW (France); 113.15 Ratify ICERD, ICESCR, ICCPR, and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Portugal); 113.16 Ratify core human rights treaties like ICCPR, ICESCR, and CAT and ensure that their provisions are respected in national legislation (Sierra Leone); 113.17 Consider ratification of core international human rights instruments to which it is not yet a party, such as ICCPR, CAT and ICESCR (Sweden); 113.18 Abolish the death penalty and sign and ratify both Optional Protocols to the ICCPR (Portugal); 113.19 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Uruguay); 113.20 Ratify the core international human rights conventions to which it is not a party and the Rome Statute (Slovenia); 113.21 Consider acceding to ICCPR, ICESCR and ICC Rome Statute by the next review (Italy); 113.22 Review the reservation to CRC and CEDAW (Sweden); 113.23 Consider lifting reservations to articles 14, 20 and 21 of CRC and articles 9 and 29 of CEDAW (Burkina Faso); 113.24 Review the broad reservations to CRC and to CEDAW (Portugal); 113.25 Withdraw all remaining reservations to CRC and CEDAW (Slovenia); 113.26 Lift its reservations to article 9 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Canada); 113.27 Withdraw existing reservations to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Russian Federation); 113.28 Continue and complete the process of ratification of OP-CRC-AC (Burkina Faso); 113.29 Ratify CRC, which it signed in 2008, and submit its outstanding report (Sierra Leone); 113.30 Continue its efforts to complete the ratification process for CRPD (India); 113.31 Continue enhancing the rights of persons with disabilities as well as accelerate the ratification process for the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) (Republic of Korea); 113.32 Consider ratifying the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, as a matter of priority (Indonesia); 113.33 Ratify the Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Argentina); 113.34 Accede to the International Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Armenia); 113.35 Consider the ratification of the Palermo Protocol on Trafficking in Persons (Philippines); 113.36 Consider acceding to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol (Uruguay); 113.37 Ratify ILO Convention No. 189 concerning decent work for female and male domestic workers (Uruguay); 113.38 Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families and ILO Convention No. 189 (Philippines); 113.39 Review its national legislation and bring into conformity with the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women (Albania); 113.40 Strengthen the legislation to ban the use of children under 18 for the purpose of commercial sex, prostitution and pornography (Mexico); 113.41 Enact legislation to prohibit explicit corporal punishment of children in all settings, including the home, schools and alternative care facilities (Montenegro); 113.42 Use the national programme “Brunei Vision 2035” as a guide for the adoption of national legislation on gender equality and women’s empowerment (Russian Federation); 113.43 Initiate reforms to bring its legislation on and practice of freedom of expression and opinion in line with international standards (Tunisia); 113.44 Consider revising relevant acts restricting the freedom of expression and media in order to ensure that they conform with international human rights standards (Slovenia); 113.45 Amend the Sedition Act and the Local Newspapers Order 1958 to strengthen freedom of expression in line with international human rights obligations (Canada); 113.46 Amend relevant regulations to align them with the international standards on freedom of expression and freedom of the press (Italy); 113.47 Implement the reforms needed to bring its legislative framework and practices into line with international norms and standards on freedom of the press and freedom of expression (Belgium); 113.48 Revise the Penal Code Order of 2013 to prohibit torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and to bring Brunei’s domestic legislation into line with its international human rights commitments on the freedoms of religion and of expression (United States of America); 113.49 Repeal the emergency powers and the Sedition Act to bring Brunei’s domestic legislation into line with its international human rights commitments on the freedoms of expression, of peaceful assembly and of association (United States of America); 113.50 Review and amend all legislation placing undue and arbitrary restrictions on the right to freedom of expression, in particular the Sedition Act, the Undesirable Publication Act and the Local Newspapers Order, and put an end to censorship of the media and decriminalize defamation (Czech Republic); 113.51 Strengthen the text and enforcement of legislation that protects internationally recognized labour rights for all workers, particularly those rights relating to forced labour and freedom of association (United States of America) 113.52 Enforce the Trafficking and Smuggling Persons Order to hold accountable labour and sex traffickers (United States of America); 113.53 Take the necessary measures to amend the legislation on nationality in order to establish equality between men and women regarding the transmission of nationality to their children (Argentina); 113.54 Consider reviewing its national legislation and regulations to incorporate greater gender perspective and women’s rights in the workplace and mobilize support for women in need (Bhutan); 113.55 Step up efforts towards respecting the principle of interdependence of human rights, as laid down in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, by promoting and protecting economic and social rights on an equal footing with those of a civil and political nature. This may be achieved by ratifying international instruments on civil and political rights and by strengthening national legislation relating to the protection of fundamental rights and freedoms (Brazil); 113.56 Decriminalize sexual activity between consenting adults and repeal all provisions of the newly enacted Penal Code that discriminate against women and sexual minorities and introduce cruel or inhuman forms of punishment (Czech Republic); 113.57 Amend article 375 of the Penal Code, dealing with the crime of rape, in order to remove the exception for sexual intercourse by a man with his wife (Ireland); 113.58 Postpone the implementation of the Sharia Penal Code Order, 2013, pending a comprehensive review ensuring the Order’s compliance with international human rights standards, and put in place a formal moratorium on the use of the death penalty, with a view to its abolition (Ireland); 113.59 Enhance efforts to promote understanding of the Sharia Penal Code through awareness programmes and other relevant activities (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 113.60 Ensure that the provisions and the application of the Sharia Penal Code Order remain in strict compliance with human rights law, which includes the ban of any inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (Italy); 113.61 Withdraw the amendments to the Penal Code that introduce the death penalty and maintain the current de facto moratorium (Netherlands); 113.62 Continue to promote just and fair implementation of the Sharia Penal Code through adequate training and capacity building (Pakistan); 113.63 Delay the entry into force of the revised Penal Code and conduct a comprehensive review to ensure its compliance with international human rights standards (Sweden); 113.64 Ensure that implementation of the Sharia Penal Code Order 2013 is compliant with international human rights standards and does not lead to the imposition of the death penalty or torture or other inhuman or degrading punishment (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 113.65 Implement the Sharia Penal Code in a manner consistent with international human rights standards (Australia); 113.66 Reconsider the use of corporal and capital punishment under the Sharia Penal Code (Australia); 113.67 Review the Islamic Penal Code in order to meet minimum human rights standards and clarify its application to foreigners and non-Muslims (Spain); 113.68 Reinstitute its suspension of implementation of the Sharia Penal Code. Conduct a comprehensive review of the new Penal Code in relation to obligations under international law (Canada); 113.69 Repeal or amend those sections of the Penal Code that prevent LGBT persons from having equal rights (Netherlands); 113.70 Proceed to the abolition of current legislation criminalizing sexual relations between persons of the same sex (Spain); 113.71 Decriminalize sexual activity between same-sex consenting adults and ensure the protection of human rights for sexual minorities in conformity with the State’s human rights obligations (Canada); 113.72 Decriminalize sexual relations between consenting adults of the same sex (France); 113.73 Reform Bruneian laws and policies, such as the Sedition Act, to ensure consistency with international standards (Australia); 113.74 Increase the age of criminal responsibility, which is now set at 7 years, to conform to international standards (Sierra Leone); 113.75 Raise the minimum age of criminal responsibility and prohibit sentences of corporal punishment and life imprisonment for children under the age of 18 (Czech Republic); 113.76 Continue its efforts to raise the minimum age of criminal responsibility (Uruguay); 113.77 Raise the minimum age of criminal responsibility and explicitly prohibit life imprisonment for persons under the age of 18 (Germany); 113.78 Bring into line the definition of minor in all legal domains, especially the penal, and prohibit life sentences and corporal punishment for crimes committed by minors (Mexico); 113.79 Adopt reforms allowing women the transmission of citizenship as a measure in favour of gender equality and the reduction of cases of statelessness (Mexico); 113.80 Facilitate the integration and naturalization of stateless persons who are permanent residents (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 113.81 Bring into force the country’s law that encompasses specific provisions for special categories of patients, such as mentally disabled offenders and those lacking capacity, to give consent for treatment (Bahrain); 113.82 Strengthen the legislative framework to reflect the provisions of international law on the protection of children (Maldives); 113.83 Take necessary steps to improve expertise of Brunei Darussalam’s obligations in ensuring effective implementation of human rights instruments to which it is a party (Cambodia); 113.84 Continue developing the institutional framework with respect to the promotion and protection of human rights (Jordan); 113.85 Establish a national human rights commission in conformity with the Paris Principles (Tunisia); 113.86 Establish an independent national human rights institution that is compliant with the Paris Principles (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 113.87 Consider establishing a national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Egypt); 113.88 Consider the establishment of an independent national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (India); 113.89 Set up its national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Sierra Leone); 113.90 Continue measures to strengthen the capacity of national human rights protection mechanisms (Uzbekistan); 113.91 Continue to pursue its social policies upholding the institution of the family in line with traditional family values (Bangladesh); 113.92 Continue all efforts and measures aimed at promoting and strengthening capacity of national institutions for the implementation of Islamic sharia rules (Saudi Arabia); 113.93 Continue its policies on improving the rights of the child (Jordan); 113.94 Intensify efforts and strengthen policies and strategies to address the sale and trafficking of persons, especially women and children (Costa Rica); 113.95 Continue its efforts in training and capacity-building programmes for government and law enforcement officials in order to strengthen efficiency in the promotion and protection of human rights within the existing laws and policies (Malaysia); 113.96 Take into account the constructive contributions arising from this review in the current national social policies (Nicaragua); 113.97 Continue strengthening its successful education policies as well as the social protection programmes being implemented in order to provide the highest quality of life and well-being to its people (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 113.98 Maintain constructive and cooperative dialogue with the international community in the field of human rights (Timor-Leste); 113.99 Continue providing the full exercise of women and children rights within the framework of the Plan of Action on Family Institution and Women (Kazakhstan); 113.100 Continue its initiatives to improve the living standards of its people, especially in meeting the basic needs of vulnerable groups (Kuwait); 113.101 Continue strengthening and implementing the current Plan of Action for Women and the Family Institution (Nicaragua); 113.102 Continue the programmes and national plans aimed at empowering youth (Syrian Arab Republic); 113.103 Continue efforts to promote and protect the rights of women and children on all levels (Qatar); 113.104 Continue its endeavour to promote and protect the human rights of children and women (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 113.105 Continue its efforts to promote education and training in human rights (Djibouti); 113.106 Intensify efforts to develop a human rights education system and to strengthen the culture of human rights (Uzbekistan); 113.107 Continue to ensure the fulfilment of the needs of vulnerable groups in Brunei Darussalam and, in this regard, also continue to uphold its commitments to the relevant international human rights instruments to which Brunei Darussalam is a party (Pakistan); 113.108 Further its endeavours with regard to the smooth and productive activities of the six Special Committees to address the issues of poverty; community mentality; immoral behaviour; crime; family institution and women; and persons with disabilities and the elderly (Azerbaijan); 113.109 Underscore discipline and respect by youth for the aged under Brunei’s Care for the Elderly Project, bearing in mind that an older person or parent who is abused by a caregiver would still feel humiliated, however much he or she is fed (Ghana); 113.110 Endeavour to sustain its Senior Citizens Activity Centre to enable youth to learn from the experience of the elderly (Ghana); 113.111 Continue its efforts in maintaining social harmony (Singapore); 113.112 Continue its cooperation with the United Nations and other international organizations to strengthen human rights (Myanmar); 113.113 Continue its cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights on all issues of mutual interest (Romania); 113.114 Continue its engagement with various institutions to promote and protect human rights in the regional and international fora (Kuwait); 113.115 Continue and strengthen the active interaction with regional and international organizations of human rights (Morocco); 113.116 Continue its constructive role and contribution in the promotion and protection of human rights in the region, particularly through established regional frameworks in ASEAN, such as the ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights (AICHR), the ASEAN Commission on the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Women and Children (ACWC) (Myanmar); 113.117 Collaborate with treaty bodies and special procedures mandate holders (Chad); 113.118 Step up its cooperation with the United Nations by addressing a standing invitation to special procedures and present the overdue report on the implementation of the CRC (Portugal); 113.119 Consider issuing a standing invitation to the United Nations special procedures (Ukraine); 113.120 Cooperate with the special procedures of the United Nations in issuing a standing invitation and facilitating their visits (France); 113.121 Foster an inclusive society in which all, regardless of race, citizenship and religion, are equally protected (Sweden); 113.122 Ensure the principle of equality before the law and respect for the fundamental rights of all citizens without distinction of any kind, such as sex, race, religion or belief (France); 113.123 Implement awareness projects and activities to combat discriminatory attitudes and further its efforts to promote human rights education (Albania); 113.124 Continue to make efforts to further promote women’s rights and eliminate discrimination (Japan);  113.125 Respect the fundamental principle of equality between men and women, in particular by allowing women from Brunei Darussalam to transmit their nationality to their children and by raising the age of marriage for women (France); 113.126 Maintain the moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing the death penalty and provide statistics, including sex and age, on persons sentenced to the death penalty or executed (France); 113.127 Maintain the moratorium and ultimately move to abolish the death penalty in law (Australia); 113.128 Uphold Brunei’s long-lasting moratorium on the death penalty (Czech Republic); 113.129 Refrain from any steps to extend the application of the death penalty or otherwise alter the legal system in a manner that would violate human rights (Germany); 113.130 Abolish the death penalty for all crimes (Montenegro); 113.131 If Brunei continues to use the death penalty, it should meet at least the minimum international standards on death penalty (ECOSOC resolution 1984/50) and the relevant provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (articles 6 and 14) and the Convention on the Rights of the Child (article 37) (Belgium); 113.132 Establish a formal moratorium on the death penalty and work towards its abolition (Sweden); 113.133 Address specifically the root causes of gender violence by promoting awareness programmes in the education sector and by the economic empowerment of women (Spain); 113.134 Continue its efforts in safeguarding the rights of women and children, particularly in combating trafficking in persons (Philippines); 113.135 Continue enhancing its efforts to strengthen the family institution and to empower women and ensure their enjoyment of their legitimate rights and ensure women’s effective participation in decision-making (Sudan); 113.136 Prohibiting corporal punishment in all settings, including in the home (Uruguay); 113.137 Ban corporal punishment sentences and life sentences, in particular for children (Costa Rica); 113.138 Step up its efforts in the promotion and protection of the rights of children, including continuing its measures to combat violence against children (Afghanistan); 113.139 Strengthen and widen the scope of the awareness campaigns against child abuse, as well as the establishment of the Action Team on Child Protection to oversee cases of abuse, including corporal punishment (Brazil); 113.140 Strengthen the measures adopted to ensure the effective prohibition of  prostitution by minors under 18 years, paying particular attention to the prohibition of the use of this type of prostitution or of the offer of it (Spain); 113.141 Implement article 3 (b) of ILO Convention No. 182, which requires States parties to establish strict prohibition of the use, recruitment or offering of a child for prostitution, production of pornography or pornographic performances (Belgium); 113.142 Take further measures to ensure sufficient data on the prevalence of the worst forms of child labour in the country and particularly with regard to child trafficking (Albania); 113.143 Redouble its efforts to ensure effective control in the fight against the sale and trafficking of children, including by raising awareness and by providing agents at the border with the necessary tools to identify victims and vulnerable populations so as to combat trafficking effectively (Belgium); 113.144 Take effective and time-bound measures to ensure that children, with particular attention to children of migrant workers, are protected from trafficking and prostitution (Slovenia); 113.145 Extend its participation and share its experience in the field of combating trafficking in persons with the countries of the region and continue its efforts to cooperate with the international community to eliminate this social scourge (United Arab Emirates); 113.146 Continue its efforts against trafficking in persons (Azerbaijan); 113.147 Continue taking measures on combating trafficking in persons (Kazakhstan); 113.148 Step up efforts in the area of combating human trafficking, including training of officials on identifying victims of human trafficking as well as measures for the protection and rehabilitation of victims (Belarus); 113.149 Continue to strengthen efforts to combat human trafficking and to raise awareness of its danger (Qatar); 113.150 Promote freedom of religion and belief, including by increasing access to religious literature, places of worship and public religious gatherings for non-Muslims and non-Shafi’i Muslims (Canada); 113.151 Ensure full freedom of expression and end media censorship (Sweden); 113.152 Attach greater importance to the promotion of civil and political rights, recognizing the indivisibility and interdependence of human rights, and grant freedom of speech and other civil liberties to its citizens (Germany); 113.153 Continue to promote the empowerment of women, particularly their employment and participation in politics and the decision-making process (Thailand); 113.154 Continue efforts to promote the status of women in society and their effective participation in the decision-making process of the country (Algeria); 113.155 Continue to work on the formation of a national mechanism for women`s empowerment (Belarus); 113.156 Take further steps towards ensuring better representation and participation of women in public and political life, including in the Government and Parliament (Egypt); 113.157 Strengthen efforts to promote empowerment of women and gender equality with the objective of increasing their participation in decision-making (Maldives); 113.158 Continue to promote opportunities for women in society so that they can actively participate in the decision-making process (Nicaragua); 113.159 Continue its efforts to achieve sustainable economic development, improving education and training, protection and empowerment of vulnerable groups, such as women and the poor (Yemen); 113.160 Continue efforts to promote economic growth through its national development plans and ensure greater work opportunities for its youth and women (Viet Nam); 113.161 Further protect women’s rights by providing more assistance to poor women and women with disabilities (China); 113.162 Continue its efforts to ensure adequate housing, access to health care and education as means to ensure a quality standard of living for its people (Turkey); 113.163 Continue its exemplary efforts to improve the living standards of the people, particularly by ensuring their access to quality health-care services and education (Lao People’s Democratic Republic); 113.164 Continue all initiatives and efforts to improve the standard of living of the people of Brunei, especially in the field of health and quality of education (Saudi Arabia); 113.165 Further enhance national mechanisms and invest more resources in improving the well-being of the people, including through adequate provision of housing (Viet Nam); 113.166 Continue its efforts to design and implement its plans aimed at promoting human development programmes in the important sectors in the country (Oman); 113.167 Ensure that continuous efforts are undertaken to develop its human capital through education and training and by empowering vulnerable groups (Sri Lanka); 113.168 Continue to meet the basic needs of vulnerable groups in the country, especially women, children, the elderly and persons with disabilities (Lao People’s Democratic Republic); 113.169 Accelerate putting in place a comprehensive development plan for the health system and its infrastructure (Bahrain); 113.170 Continue putting an emphasis on the promotion of human rights, ensuring the right to basic standards of health, education, nutrition and welfare of the entire population (Cuba); 113.171 Continue to improve its national health-care system and ensure access to quality health care (Singapore); 113.172 Continue to strengthen its comprehensive free health-care system by taking the necessary steps to increase the number of qualified local health personnel in the country (Sri Lanka); 113.173 Increase its provision of scholarships to students to study medicine and intensity efforts to optimize facilities and human resource utilization, focusing on efficient health system models (State of Palestine); 113.174 Continue ensuring the right to safe drinking water and sanitation for all persons (Egypt); 113.175 Continue to increase public awareness of the harm of narcotic drugs (Russian Federation); 113.176 Continue the programmes and national plans to develop education, especially in early childhood (Syrian Arab Republic); 113.177 Continue to promote the right to education for all, particularly for the underprivileged and disadvantaged (Thailand); 113.178 Continue to seek international technical cooperation and assistance, especially in the areas of health and education (Timor-Leste); 113.179 Take further measures aimed at ensuring the right to education for all and promote human rights education and training (Ukraine); 113.180 Further include human rights education and awareness-raising programmes in school and university curricula as part of its efforts to promote human rights in the country (Armenia); 113.181 Continue its efforts with a view to further promoting its position on achieving almost all targets of the MDGs (Azerbaijan); 113.182 Continue to implement the national education strategic plan to raise the coverage of education and its quality (China); 113.183 Continue its efforts in the promotion and protection of children’s rights, including through the implementation of the Plan of Action of Family Institution and Women and public education campaigns on the rights of the child (Indonesia); 113.184 Continue promoting the rights of children, particularly in guaranteeing their access to quality education, so as to ensure that they would be able to enter the workforce with the necessary skills (Malaysia); 113.185 Increase the access of children, women and persons with disabilities to education (Morocco); 113.186 Continue to take further steps to strengthen its education system, particularly through the initiatives outlined in its Strategic Plan (Singapore); 113.187 Continue to actively promote the right to education for all and further its efforts to promote human rights education and training (State of Palestine); 113.188 Prioritize the enjoyment of the right to education all over the country (Sudan); 113.189 Continue to implement programmes aimed at improving the accessibility for persons with disabilities in the learning and working environment (Cambodia). 114. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as being endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex 
[English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of Brunei Darussalam was headed by The Honourable Pehin Dato Lim Jock Seng, Second Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade, and composed of the following members: • 	H.E. Abu Sufian Haji Ali, Ambassador and Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of Brunei Darussalam to the United Nations, World Trade Organization and other International Organizations in Geneva; • 	Mr. Yahya Haji Idris, Permanent Secretary, Prime Minister’s Office; • 	H.E. Datin Paduka Tan Bee Yong, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade; • 	Ms. P A Mansurah Izzul Bolkiah, Assistant Director, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade; • 	Mr. Dato Seri Setia Haji Tasim Hj Akim, Director of Islamic Legal Unit, Ministry of Religious Affairs; • 	Mrs. Hjh Nor Hashimah Hj Mohd Taib, Assistant Solicitor-General. Attorney General’s Chambers; • 	Mr. Mohd Shafiee Hj Kassim, Acting Director, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade; • 	Mr. Azmi Hj Hafneh, Acting Director, Department of Immigration and National Registration; • 	Mr. Hj Mohammad Rosli Hj Ibrahim, Senior Special Duties Officer, Prime Minister’s Office; • 	Ms. Hjh Noridah Abdul Hamid, Acting Deputy Director, Ministry of Culture, Youth and Sports; • 	Mr. Rozan Justin Teo Hj Azlan, Assistant Labour Commissioner, Department of Labour; • 	Ms. Normassahrol Hafyzah Ahmad Sah, Education Officer, Ministry of Religious Affairs; • 	Ms. Mariani Hj Sallehuddin, Legal Counsel, Attorney General’s Chambers; • 	Ms. Nazirah Hj Zaini, Second Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade;  • 	Ms. Nurussa’adah Muharram, Second Secretary, Permanent Mission of Brunei Darussalam to the United Nations, World Trade Organization and other International Organizations in Geneva; • 	Ms. Hjh Norhartijah Hj Puteh, Syariah Legal Officer, Ministry of Religious Affairs;  • 	Ms. Siti Zaharah Hj Abdul Razak, Community Development Officer, Ministry of Culture, Youth and Sports; • 	Ms. Norismahfadzalina Hj Ismail, Senior Chief Immigration Officer, Department of Immigration and National Registration; • 	Mr. Cheong Kit Kheong Victor, Second Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade. 