Distr.: General 7 July 2014 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-seventh session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Costa Rica * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.14-07565  (E) *1407565* 
Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–127 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–19 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 20–126 5 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 127–129 14  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 26 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its nineteenth session from 28 April 7 to 9 May 2014. The review of Costa Rica was held at the 11th meeting, on 5 May 2014. The delegation of Costa Rica was headed by Gioconda Ubeda Rivera, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs and Worship. At its 17th meeting, held on 8 May 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on Costa Rica. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Costa Rica: Argentina, Botswana and Viet Nam. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Costa Rica: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/19/CRI/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/19/CRI/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/19/CRI/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, Germany, Mexico, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Slovenia and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Costa Rica through the troika. The questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR). A summary of additional questions posed during the interactive dialogue by Angola, Canada, France, Ghana, Hungary, Iceland and Italy can be found in section I. B below. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. Costa Rica indicated that it was a great responsibility to report on its compliance with and implementation of its international human rights obligations. In its second national report, Costa Rica had provided information on the follow-up to the recommendations received in 2009. In 2010, it had presented an additional document with its position on the recommendations, and in 2012 it had presented a midterm report on progress made and on specific compliance with some of the recommendations.  6. In preparing the second national report, 21 institutions from the executive branch, which together formed the Inter-Institutional Committee on Follow-Up to and Compliance with International Human Rights Obligations (CIIDDHH), had been involved. The judicial branch, the Office of the Ombudsman, the Supreme Electoral Court and the Legislative Assembly had also participated as observers. CIIDDHH had now been institutionalized as a mechanism for consultation and dialogue, through an executive decree, and with a permanent consultative body for civil society. 7. Costa Rica was pleased to report that, since the previous review, it had ratified the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CPED), the 2005 Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention No. 189 (2011) concerning decent work for domestic workers and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure. It had also signed the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (OP.ICESCR), which the delegation hoped would soon be approved by the Legislative Assembly. 8. Costa Rica was a middle-income country that, since 1949, had consistently invested in education. In 2011, Costa Rica had achieved a literacy rate of 97.6 per cent. The country had also a programme of cash transfer which was conditional on students remaining in the formal education system. Costa Rica hoped to increase the income of poor families, thus paving the way for access to education and ensuring universal secondary education. That would also be a step towards reducing poverty, combating the school dropout rate, addressing examination failure and tackling child labour. 9. Costa Rica had an internationally recognized quality universal health system, which was reflected in the average life expectancy of 79.3 years and in the low rate of child mortality. In 2011, 97.5 per cent of the population had their own water supply and nine out of ten persons had drinking water. The right to water had been recognized by the Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice and in March 2014, a new law on water resources had been approved on first reading. 10. Despite the aforementioned progress, Costa Rica faced challenges stemming from the structural situation which was reflected in the levels of social inequality and inequity, as well as the increasing level of organized crime in the region. 11. The delegation reported on a number of important mechanisms that had been established or strengthened, and legislation, policies and programmes that had been adopted for the care and protection of the most vulnerable population groups, thereby promoting social inclusion. 12. The rights of children and adolescents had been seriously affected by increase in sexual exploitation, sexual abuse and adolescent pregnancy, in particular when they were linked to abusive relations with adults. The lead body in that area, the Patronato Nacional de la Infancia (National Child Agency), conducted policies, programmes and projects for the comprehensive protection of minors and their families, in coordination with other institutions and non-governmental organizations. Nevertheless, it was important to continue strengthening those programmes. 13. Costa Rica was also working to mainstream a gender perspective in all areas and had carried out a number of initiatives in State bodies to build a society based on the principle of gender equality. 14. With regard to specific population groups, the State had had to take targeted measures for indigenous peoples, persons of African descent, migrants and refugees. As part of the 2001 World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance held in Durban, and following the 2009 Durban Review Conference, Costa Rica had been pleased to announce that it had adopted a National Policy for a society free from racism, racial discrimination and xenophobia and a related Action Plan for 2014– 2019. There was currently also a proposal for a reform of the Constitution which would declare Costa Rica to be a multi-ethnic and pluricultural nation. 15. Costa Rica had a strong judicial system which granted rights to persons regardless of their nationality, and which was strengthened through numerous rulings of the Constitutional Chamber, guaranteeing the effectiveness of the standards related to the migrant population. Furthermore, over the previous four years, Costa Rica had been developing a new Migration Act and a comprehensive migration policy with a human rights perspective in order to achieve the integration of the migrant population in society. As a result, the conditions of migrants in Costa Rica had significantly improved between 2000 and 2011. 16. Regarding the refugee population, Costa Rica had a long humanitarian tradition and long-standing experience in the integration of refugees. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) collaborated closely with Costa Rica. 17. Costa Rica had also been discussing ways to guarantee the rights of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) population. Activities were being carried out and initiatives were being developed in which civil society had played a fundamental role. 18. Another area in which the role of civil society had been important was the promotion and protection of the rights of persons with disabilities. Following the first UPR cycle, Costa Rica had promulgated a series of executive decrees which sought to improve the living conditions of persons with disabilities.  19. The delegation briefly referred to the national institutions which guaranteed compliance with international human rights standards in Costa Rica. Reference was made to the existence, since 1989, of the Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court and of the Office of the Ombudsman, which had been created in 1992, and had been accredited with A status by the International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights. The delegation also reported that, in compliance with the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (OP-CAT), in 2014, Costa Rica had adopted a law to create the National Mechanism for the Prevention of Torture, which would contribute to reducing overcrowding in prisons and improving living conditions for detainees. The new preventive mechanism was administratively assigned to the Office of the Ombudsman, but was financially and operationally independent, which guaranteed that it would function without any interference. Reference was also made to the National Coalition against Illicit Smuggling of Migrants and Trafficking in Persons, which was made up of 21 public institutions. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 20. During the interactive dialogue, 89 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue can be found in section II below. All written statements of the delegations, to be checked against delivery on the United Nations Webcast archives,1 are posted on the extranet of the Human Rights Council when available.2 21. The United States of America commended Costa Rica for its efforts to address prison conditions and combat child labour, but remained concerned about the exploitation of children, the prevalence of violence against women and trafficking in persons. 22. Uruguay recalled that Costa Rica was a stable and consolidated democracy. It acknowledged progress in addressing migration issues and noted the reduction in the use of administrative detention. 1 	United Nations Webcast archives at http://webtv.un.org/watch/costa-rica-review-19th-session-of.universal-periodic-review/3537639868001/. 2 Available on the UPR extranet at https://extranet.ohchr.org/sites/upr/Sessions/19session/CostaRica/Pages/default.aspx. 23. Turkmenistan identified the establishment of CIIDDHH as an example of good practice; CIIDDHH had provided areas of exchange for civil society. 24. Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) welcomed the country’s efforts to address poverty, distribution of wealth and social exclusion. It acknowledged efforts to improve the situation of indigenous peoples, persons of African descent, migrants and refugees. 25. Viet Nam commended Costa Rica for its human rights achievements and its active cooperation with the Human Rights Council. It was concerned about human trafficking, unemployment and child labour. 26. Zambia commended Costa Rica for its cooperation with OHCHR, the establishment and maintenance of institutional bodies, the existence of comprehensive legislation on migration policy and the promotion of the rule of law. 27. Albania welcomed the implementation of the plan of action for the protection of children and adolescents in situations of violence. It commended the measures undertaken to mainstream a gender perspective.  28. Algeria noted the adoption of laws against human trafficking, on abolishing corporal punishment and on strengthening the National Council for Older Persons. 29. Angola noted the implementation of the recommendations from the first UPR cycle in the areas of health and education and asked about affirmative action taken for persons of African descent. 30. Argentina acknowledged the ratification of CPED and initiatives to protect the elderly. It welcomed the implementation of the national policy on disability. 31. Australia welcomed steps taken to address domestic violence and ensure independent monitoring of prison conditions. It remained concerned about child abuse, forced labour and the situation of women who were subjected to domestic servitude. 32. Azerbaijan commended the ratification of the UNESCO Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions and the establishment of CIIDDHH.  33. The Bahamas commended Costa Rica for the establishment of CIIDDHH, measures to secure vulnerable groups’ access to justice and efforts to reduce violence against women.  34. Bahrain commended the role of the Office of the Ombudsman. It welcomed the entry into force of the law on trafficking and the adoption of a preventive system to address violence against women. 35. Bangladesh commended Costa Rica for its role as Chair of the Climate Vulnerable Forum. It welcomed the measures taken to preserve the family as the traditional social institution. It expressed concern about protection of the rights of children and migrants. 36. Belgium considered Costa Rica a model in Central America with regard to respect for human rights and democratic principles. It welcomed the ratification of CPED and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure. 37. Benin noted the adoption of a national policy for children and the establishment of CIIDDHH. It urged the Government to adopt measures to promote respect for diversity. 38. Bhutan commended Costa Rica for launching national and international human rights initiatives, especially amending the Violence against Women Act and introducing the National Disability Policy 2011–2021.  39. Bolivia (Plurinational State of) highlighted institutional progress in the area of human rights. It commended the establishment of CIIDDHH. 40. Botswana welcomed the efforts of Costa Rica to address domestic violence, drug trafficking, human trafficking, sexual exploitation and child labour, and its commitment to equality and non-discrimination. 41. Brazil commended the Government for the establishment of CIIDDHH. It welcomed the adoption of the national policy for children. 42. Bulgaria welcomed the establishment of CIIDDHH and human rights programmes and policies. 43. Burundi welcomed the measures taken to curb racism. It welcomed the commitment of Costa Rica at the institutional and legislative levels to ensuring better protection of human rights for all its citizens and foreigners living on Costa Rican soil. 44. Switzerland considered that the human rights situation in Costa Rica was reasonable. However, it expressed concern about sexual exploitation of women and children and detention conditions.  45. Chad welcomed the Government’s submission of a midterm report in 2012 and the establishment of CIIDDHH. It noted the policy for a racism-free society. 46. Chile highlighted the Government’s commitment to the international promotion of human rights. It welcomed the creation of the national system for the treatment and prevention of violence against women and domestic violence. 47. China appreciated the implementation by Costa Rica of the National Policy on Gender Equality and Equity. It welcomed ongoing measures to improve the quality of education, ensure access to drinking water and protect vulnerable groups.  48. Colombia acknowledged efforts to implement the recommendations of the first UPR cycle and the Government’s collaboration with human rights mechanisms. It welcomed the legislative and institutional strengthening evidenced in the plan for a racism-free society. 49. The Congo welcomed the Government’s efforts to promote and protect the rights of women and children. The Congo noted the measures taken for a society free from racism, racial discrimination and xenophobia. 50. Côte d’Ivoire noted measures to strengthen the administration of justice and improve prison conditions. It welcomed the importance attributed to civil society and encouraged efforts to further develop social services. 51. Cuba recognized progress in the areas of equality and non-discrimination. Challenges remained, such as inequality and inequity, which enabled the presence of criminal organizations in society, increasing the drug market and trafficking in and exploitation of persons. 52. The Democratic Republic of the Congo welcomed the establishment of CIIDDHH and the permanent body for consultations with civil society. It asked for further information regarding the integration of migrants and persons of African descent. 53. Ecuador recognized efforts to comply with recommendations from the first review. However, it expressed concern about the situation of migrant workers. 54. Egypt commended the delegation for the informative and comprehensive report. Egypt believed that Costa Rica had been a responsible member of the Human Rights Council. 55. El Salvador commended Costa Rica for the progress made since the last review, which had allowed the country to undertake an internal assessment of the situation nationwide.  56. Estonia welcomed progress made in the fields of gender equality and the rights of women and children, as well as on the decriminalization of defamation. It encouraged Costa Rica to allocate adequate resources for the effective implementation of laws, policies and programmes. It called for steps to improve conditions for indigenous communities. 57. Ethiopia welcomed measures taken to address violence against women, including the establishment of a high-level commission to monitor compliance with the Violence against Women Act. It commended the promulgation of the Trafficking in Persons Act. 58. France welcomed the ratification of CPED, as well as the commitment of Costa Rica to the abolition of the death penalty at the international level. France asked about measures to address overcrowding in prisons and facilitate the reintegration of detainees, as well as the rate of violent crime. 59. Germany welcomed the adoption of a rights-based National Policy for Children and Adolescents. It remained concerned about protection of children and protective mechanisms at the local level, as well as prison overcrowding. 60. Regarding ratification of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW), Costa Rica indicated that it had previously believed that the existing laws, complemented by a resolution of the Constitutional Chamber, provided for the full protection of migrant workers and their families. However, the issue would be taken up again with greater impetus; Costa Rica therefore appreciated the recommendations that had been made in that regard. 61. Responding to comments made by Ecuador, Costa Rica indicated that it would not be able to accept recommendations or statements that were not based on reality. It was possible that there had been isolated cases of discrimination against migrant workers, which happened in every country, but it would not accept that there were no xenophobic policies in place and no systemic xenophobic actions taken. 62. In line with the voluntary commitments undertaken by Costa Rica during the last review, and under the framework of the 2001 World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, held in Durban, Costa Rica had adopted the National Policy for a society free from racism, racial discrimination and xenophobia, which aimed for an inclusive and more respectful society that embraced sociocultural and ethnic diversity. The Policy was the result of a joint process involving the State and civil society, based on the principle of “nothing about us without us” and targeting persons of African descent, indigenous or native peoples, migrants and refugees. The process had taken place under the framework of CIIDDHH and supported by OHCHR. 63. Costa Rica recognized that it faced challenges regarding indigenous peoples. The existence of a favourable judicial framework was insufficient to ensure full protection of the rights of communities if it was not accompanied by State policies and actions which sought the effective application of and compliance with the standards to which the State itself had committed. Costa Rica shared information about a recent positive experience with indigenous communities in the south. 64. The United Nations Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination had made various comments and recommendations to Costa Rica relating to the situation of indigenous peoples, particularly since 2011. Those recommendations echoed the concerns and claims of the indigenous peoples and coincided significantly with the efforts that the State was undertaking to address their situation. 65. Ghana welcomed the measures taken to improve care and respect for the elderly and improve access to water and sanitation by all. It asked about the impact of such measures. 66. Guatemala commended Costa Rica for progress made, particularly in addressing domestic violence. It shared the opinion of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and the Committee on the Rights of the Child on the importance of ratifying ICRMW. 67. Honduras commended Costa Rica for the national report. It appreciated the progress made since the previous review, in particular with regard to addressing the issue of migration. 68. Hungary took note of the ratification of CPED, the National Commission on the Improved Administration of Justice and the Access to Justice Commission. It asked about the impact of established bodies on the implementation of the Brasilia Regulations Regarding Access to Justice for Vulnerable People. 69. Iceland encouraged Costa Rica to strengthen efforts to combat trafficking in persons. It was concerned about the inadequate protection of the right to sexual and reproductive health. It raised questions on the implementation of programmes ensuring child protection and on measures to eliminate discrimination against LGBT persons. 70. India welcomed measures to promote inclusive social practices and respect for diversity, including the National Policy for a society free from racism, racial discrimination, and xenophobia. It expressed concern about the rights of indigenous peoples and acknowledged challenges that resulted from rising poverty and economic disparities. 71. Indonesia commended Costa Rica for prioritizing efforts to combat trafficking in persons. It appreciated various measures and policies for the promotion and protection of migrants, including the enactment of legislation. 72. Iraq commended Costa Rica for its accession to a number of international human rights instruments, including CPED, and the adoption of several laws, such as the Trafficking in Persons Act and the law prohibiting corporal punishment of children and adolescents. 73. Ireland commended the establishment of CIIDDHH and the Permanent Body for Consultation with Civil Society. It welcomed efforts to combat human trafficking, racism and racial discrimination. It noted, however, that concerns had been expressed about ongoing discrimination against the indigenous population. 74. Iran (Islamic Republic of) noted that there was no mechanism for the participation of indigenous peoples in decision-making regarding their well-being and development. It also noted that discrimination and violence against women and children continued. 75. Italy appreciated the establishment of CIIDDHH and measures to combat violence against women. It asked whether Costa Rica planned to include education on indigenous cultures in the national school curriculum. 76. Japan appreciated the ratification of CPED, the enhancement of the national justice system, the establishment of CIIDDHH and efforts to protect vulnerable groups, including children. 77. Libya commended efforts made to promote and protect human rights through the ratification of a number of international human rights instruments. It appreciated the adoption of a policy on the elderly and the establishment of institutions to combat trafficking. 78. Liechtenstein welcomed progress in addressing violence against women. It noted with concern reports regarding mistreatment of children by teachers, as well as by police officers in detention and incidents of intrafamily and sexual violence. It urged Costa Rica to ratify the Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute as soon as possible. 79. Malaysia acknowledged the efforts of Costa Rica to advance women’s rights, address violence against children and adolescents and combat trafficking in persons. It commended the establishment of the High Level Commission to monitor compliance with the Violence against Women Act. 80. Maldives applauded the establishment of CIIDDHH, the adoption of important legislation and the commitment of Costa Rica to environmental rights as a human rights obligation. 81. Mauritania noted the commitment and cooperation of Costa Rica with United Nations mechanisms through the ratification of and accession to different instruments. It commended measures to guarantee the rights of vulnerable groups, particularly women and children. 82. Mexico recognized efforts made to protect refugees and asylum seekers. It appreciated cooperation with human rights mechanisms that had visited the country. It hoped that Costa Rica would soon submit its overdue reports to treaty bodies. 83. Costa Rica had implemented a series of initiatives to build a society based on the principle of gender equality. One example was the establishment of the 2007–2017 national policy, which had the support of women’s organizations and other sectors of civil society. Costa Rica had also developed gender equality policies in several national institutions and provided training on gender sensitivity. Steps were being taken to combat gender stereotypes through the media. In accordance with the recommendation in paragraph 91.2 of the previous report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic (A/HRC/13/15), the National Women’s Institute (INAMU) had disseminated a first report on the situation of women’s rights in 2011. 84. In response to concerns raised by some delegations on the issue of violence against women, the delegation said that Costa Rica had established a High Level Commission to monitor compliance with the Violence against Women Act and a comprehensive care system for victims. In addition, abuse and assault against women had been criminalized in 2011, an internal register of perpetrators had been created, the initial period of protection measures had been increased to one year, access to justice for victims had been strengthened and the criminal authorities had been authorized to apply measures in the absence of specialized domestic violence courts. In 2013, an emergency plan had also been drawn up to reduce gender-related murders of women. 85. In response to concerns raised by some delegations, Costa Rica indicated that the protection and promotion of the human rights of children were a fundamental pillar of State action. The National Policy for Children and Adolescents 2009–2021 set the strategic focus of the State to promote, protect and ensure the human rights of all children. 86. Costa Rica had also established a national strategic framework entitled “Road map to make Costa Rica a country free of the worst forms of child labor”, which promoted coordination among initiatives that had a direct or indirect impact on the prevention and eradication of child labour. 87. The rights of LGBTI persons was a challenging area for Costa Rica. There had been increased interest in the debate on the recognition of the rights arising from same-sex unions. Concerning the recommendation made by Spain relating to the right of transsexual persons to identify themselves in keeping with their gender identity (A/HRC/13/15, para. 91.4), Costa Rica noted that in 2010, the Supreme Electoral Court had issued a decree providing that everyone had the right to enjoy respect for their image and sexual identity when a photograph was taken for their identity card. Costa Rica acknowledged that changing cultural attitudes was a challenge. A protocol on harassment, bullying and cyberbullying in secondary schools had also been prepared. 88. Costa Rica indicated that a subsystem of indigenous education had been established by the Ministry of Public Education. With the support of the World Bank, Costa Rica had invested in infrastructure in indigenous territories and had prepared an educational programme. 89. Administrative actions had been taken to address prison overcrowding. Some detainees had been allowed to complete their sentences using non-custodial measures and efforts had been made to improve conditions in some prisons. The State recognized that there were still significant improvements to be made. 90. In order to address trafficking in persons, the Act on Trafficking and Related Activities had been promulgated, establishing the National Coalition against Illicit Smuggling of Migrants and Trafficking in Persons. The Act provided for increased punishments for the abduction of minors, and criminalized sexual tourism and labour exploitation. The penalty for labour exploitation was more severe if the victim was under the age of 18. The Act also established procedures for the care of minors and the right of victims to bring civil actions for reparation. The National Coalition was made up of 21 institutions. The Act provided for the establishment of a specific fund which was financed by taxes to be paid by all tourists and nationals when leaving the country. Information campaigns were being carried out in the area of prevention. 91. Responding to several questions on the international jurisdiction of crimes categorized in Costa Rican legislation, the delegation said that such crimes included the possession and production of pornographic material depicting minors, and human trafficking and smuggling. The Penal Code, in article 6, established the possibility of applying Costa Rican law to punishable acts committed abroad in various cases, including when the consequences of a punishable act were felt fully or partially in Costa Rica, or when the perpetrator of a punishable act committed abroad was a Costa Rican national. 92. Montenegro welcomed progress regarding efforts to address violence against women and the implementation of a High Level Commission to monitor compliance with the Violence against Women Act. It welcomed steps to combat human trafficking. 93. Morocco commended Costa Rica for its openness. It took note of challenges faced in relation to structural inequalities, criminality, violence, poverty and the unequal distribution of wealth. 94. The Netherlands welcomed progress made in the field of protecting women against domestic violence by adopting a national response and prevention system. It was concerned about the suffering of the LGBT community as a result of discrimination. 95. Nicaragua commended Costa Rica for progress made in upholding human rights, in particular by addressing discrimination and xenophobia, as well as with regard to the adoption of the comprehensive migration policy. 96. The Niger noted that Costa Rica had ratified several international instruments and adopted various pieces of legislation to improve the human rights situation. It welcomed the institutional framework to improve the judiciary. 97. Norway welcomed the 2010 Immigration Act and the establishment of CIIDDHH. It echoed the recommendation of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women to consider reviewing abortion legislation in order to guarantee access to abortion when pregnancy was the result of rape. 98. Pakistan commended Costa Rica for its efforts to establish CIIDDHH, prevent violence against women and children, ensure gender equity, access to education and health care and combat racism, racial discrimination and xenophobia.  99. Paraguay welcomed progress made by Costa Rica in addressing human rights issues, particularly with regard to violence against women, trafficking and child labour. It commended the creation of CIIDDHH. 100. Peru appreciated the efforts made by Costa Rica, in particular, the ratification of CPED, the creation of CIIDDHH, the establishment of the national plan to address racial discrimination and xenophobia and efforts to address trafficking in persons. It offered to share its experience on regulating the right of indigenous peoples to be consulted. 101. The Philippines welcomed efforts to implement the UPR recommendations through national mechanisms and the adoption of legislation concerning violence against women and trafficking. It acknowledged the progress made with regard to migration issues. 102. Portugal welcomed the establishment of CIIDDHH and measures to protect persons who suffered from persecution in their countries of origin owing to their sexual orientation. It also welcomed measures to prevent children from dropping out of school and to address low school attendance.  103. Romania acknowledged the update on developments, commending the reinforcement of the legal framework for the protection of human rights since 2009 and the ratification of a number of international instruments. 104. The Russian Federation welcomed the report of Costa Rica and recognized that efforts had been made to implement the recommendations from the first UPR cycle. However, it acknowledged that problems continued to exist and made recommendations in that regard. 105. Rwanda commended progress made by Costa Rica in addressing migration issues and violence against women. It applauded the initiatives being undertaken to combat gender stereotypes. 106. Senegal appreciated efforts being made to realize economic and social rights, combat violence against vulnerable sectors of the population and protect child and adolescent victims of violence. 107. Serbia commended Costa Rica for implementing the recommendations from the first review, particularly in the areas of combating violence, trafficking in persons and protection of minors. It took note of affirmative action that had been taken with regard to equality and non-discrimination. It suggested that Costa Rica should reduce prison overcrowding. 108. Sierra Leone noted that Costa Rica provided a good example of the results that could be obtained when military spending was diverted to development. It was concerned by the high incidence of trafficking in children and urged Costa Rica to raise the age of sexual consent to 18 and to develop new strategies to reduce the prison population. 109. Singapore noted that achievements in combating violence against women had helped to reduce the number of gender-related murders of women. It also acknowledged the emphasis Costa Rica placed on improving access to health care, especially for women. 110. Slovakia welcomed efforts to improve human rights protection, including for children. It commended Costa Rica for its ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure and took note of activities to combat child labour. 111. Slovenia welcomed the active cooperation of Costa Rica with international human rights bodies. It commended Costa Rica for its human rights record and the establishment of CIIDDHH. 112. Spain commended Costa Rica for progress made in protecting women’s rights, including the establishment of the High Level Commission to follow-up on the implementation of the Violence against Women Act. 113. Sri Lanka took note of efforts to address violence against women. It noted the difficulties Costa Rica faced in relation to criminal organizations, the drugs trade and trafficking in persons and recognized efforts made by the Government. 114. The State of Palestine congratulated Costa Rica for progress made in the promotion and protection of human rights since the first UPR cycle. It welcomed the commitment of Costa Rica to improving people’s quality of life and developing a culture of respect and non-discrimination in the country. 115. The Sudan commended Costa Rica for its accession to different human rights treaties, its adoption of related legislation and its efforts to protect the rights of vulnerable groups. It also commended its efforts to combat human trafficking. 116. Canada asked the delegation for more information on initiatives to continue fighting racism, particularly against persons of African descent, indigenous communities, migrants and refugees.  117. Thailand welcomed the establishment of CIIDDHH and the permanent body for consultation with civil society. 118. Togo applauded the important actions undertaken by Costa Rica since the first UPR cycle to ensure the effective enjoyment of human rights in the country. 119. Trinidad and Tobago acknowledged the challenges and efforts to enhance the Costa Rican framework for the promotion and protection of human rights, including the development of programmes and policies targeting specific groups. 120. Tunisia appreciated efforts undertaken since the last review of Costa Rica, including the ratification of international and regional human rights instruments and the adoption of national policies. 121. Uzbekistan welcomed the establishment of CIIDDHH. It expressed concern at the vulnerable situation of women, discrimination against indigenous communities and children of African descent and the high number of juveniles in prison. It noted allegations of ill-treatment of children by police and prison officers. 122. Ukraine commended Costa Rica for its efforts to promote and protect human rights, ensure the rule of law and comply with international human rights standards. It encouraged Costa Rica to pursue those activities, in particular those related to child labour. 123. The United Kingdom welcomed the ongoing emphasis in Costa Rica on protecting children from abuse and urged Costa Rica to ensure that all offenders were prosecuted. It also encouraged Costa Rica to strengthen efforts to protect women from domestic violence and reduce discrimination against LGBT persons. 124. The delegation appreciated the comments and recommendations made with regard to children and young persons who were victims of organized crime. It noted that the Costa Rican authorities were working to guarantee their protection. 125. The delegation was grateful for the spirit of dialogue and cooperation in which the country’s challenges had been identified. The current exercise was especially enriching, above all because, prior to the meeting, an internal review of the human rights situation in the country had been carried out, which had enabled Costa Rica to identify the areas in which efforts needed to be made. 126. Costa Rica was committed to the work of the Human Rights Council. It had always defended civil society’s participation at the national level and within the Council. The commitment of Costa Rica to the Council was reflected in the fact that it was standing for re-election to the Council, for which it hoped to be able to count on the support of States. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations.. 127. The following recommendations enjoy the support of Costa Rica, which considers that they are already being implemented or are in the process of implementation: 127.1 Consider accession to ILO Convention No. 189 (Philippines); 127.2 Ratify ILO Convention No. 189 (Sierra Leone); 127.3 Ratify ILO Convention No. 189 on decent work for domestic workers (Uzbekistan); 127.4 Finalize without further delay the fifth report to the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the sixth report to the Human Rights Committee and the third report to the Committee against Torture, overdue since 2012 (Norway); 127.5 Submit its outstanding reports to the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Human Rights Committee and the Committee against Torture (Sierra Leone). 128. The following recommendations will be examined by Costa Rica, which will respond to them in due course, but no later than the twenty-seventh session of the Human Rights Council, in September 2014: 128.1 Ratify the international instruments to which it is not yet a party (Benin); 128.2 Consider the ratification of the international instruments to which it is not yet a party (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 128.3 Consider the possibility of ratifying ICRMW (Uruguay); Consider ratifying ICRMW (Albania); Consider becoming a party to ICRMW as recommended previously (Azerbaijan); Consider acceding to ICRMW (Chad); Consider the ratification of ICRMW (Ghana); Consider the ratification of ICRMW (Indonesia); Consider ratifying ICRMW (Nicaragua); Consider ratifying ICRMW (Niger); Consider ratifying ICRMW (Rwanda); Consider ratifying ICRMW (Sri Lanka); Consider accession to ICRMW (Philippines); 128.4 Sign and ratify ICRMW (Honduras); Ratify ICRMW (Argentina); Ratify ICRMW (Ecuador); (El Salvador); Ratify ICRMW (Guatemala); Ratify ICRMW (Paraguay); Ratify ICRMW (Sierra Leone); 128.5 Favourably consider ratifying ICRMW (Algeria); 128.6 Consider ratifying ICRMW and harmonizing domestic legislation with international norms (Senegal); 128.7 Complete the ratification process of OP-ICESCR (Slovakia); ** The conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 128.8 Ratify OP-ICESCR (Portugal); 128.9 Take further measures for the harmonization of legislation and policies with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, including with regard to children affected by migration (Albania); 128.10 Further elaborate provisions in its legislation on the justiciability of the right to education (Bulgaria); 128.11 Implement the recommendation of the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples concerning the bill for the autonomous development of indigenous peoples and the restitution of lands to indigenous communities (Congo); 128.12 Ensure that the Legislative Assembly adopts Law 14.352 on the autonomous development of indigenous peoples (Spain); 128.13 Adopt a law guaranteeing the rights of indigenous people in the country (Uzbekistan); 128.14 Revise the law on abortion in order to identify other circumstances in which abortion could be permitted, particularly abortion in cases of pregnancy resulting from rape or incest (Belgium); 128.15 Amend the current law to legalize abortion after rape (Switzerland); 128.16 Take steps to guarantee full and effective recognition of sexual and reproductive rights, notably through the decriminalization of voluntary interruption of pregnancy (France); 128.17 Elaborate clear medical guidelines on access to legal abortion and consider reviewing the law relating to abortion, including to ensure access to legal abortion in cases of pregnancy resulting from rape (Iceland); 128.18 Consider reviewing the law related to abortion to guarantee access to abortion when pregnancy is a result of rape (Norway); 128.19 Introduce legislation to create a legal and permanent basis for the “Defensoría del los Habitantes” set up to protect human rights defenders, including providing it with an adequate budget and financial autonomy (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 128.20 Fully align national legislation with the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and ratify the Kampala Amendments to the Rome Statute (Estonia);  128.21 Achieve the harmonization of national legislation with the Rome Statute (Tunisia); 128.22 Continue efforts aimed at harmonization of legislation and public policies with the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Ukraine); 128.23 Criminalize all forms of trafficking in children (Honduras); 128.24 Enact regulations to the 2013 law establishing a referral mechanism for victims of trafficking to enable them to apply for asylum, where appropriate (Ireland); 128.25 Introduce in the Criminal Code the crime of trafficking in children, particularly those trafficked for the purposes of commercial and sexual exploitation (Mexico); 128.26 Enact a new water law as soon as possible giving effect to the right to water, as recommended by the Independent Expert on the issue of human rights obligations relating to the enjoyment of a safe, clean, healthy and sustainable environment and the Independent Expert on the issue of human rights obligations related to access to safe drinking water and sanitation (Spain); 128.27 Consider undertaking a comprehensive review of its normative framework on sanitation, with a view to ensuring the establishment of a coherent and comprehensive system for the collection, management, treatment and disposal of wastewater in order to prevent the contamination of rivers and other water streams (Egypt); 128.28 Provide the necessary resources to the Defensoría de los Habitantes, which constitutes the national prevention mechanism provided for under OP.CAT, so that it can fully implement its mandate (France); 128.29 Extend the scope of the activities of the national preventive mechanism under OP-CAT in order to include places of deprivation of liberty which are not under the authority of the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Public Security, Interior and the Police (Hungary); 128.30 Take effective measures to generate inclusive social practices to ensure the observance of the human rights of indigenous peoples, persons of African descent, migrants and refugees (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 128.31 Further strengthen the social and comprehensive protection programmes carried out by the National Council on Children and Adolescents through increased resources, in order to achieve greater effectiveness in their management (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of));  128.32 Ensure the integration and effective implementation of strategies on drop-out rate reduction, child labour elimination and poverty alleviation (Viet Nam);  128.33 Continue efforts aimed at ensuring all the rights of children and adolescents, girls in particular, in the area of freedom of expression and opinion, as well as addressing the special needs of children with disabilities, indigenous children, migrant children and other children in vulnerable situations (El Salvador); 128.34 Guarantee the effective protection of children’s rights offline as well as online by amending the relevant national laws if necessary and providing adequate resources (Estonia); 128.35 Further enforce the implementation of a comprehensive child protection system, especially for those suffering from violence, forced labour and sexual exploitation (Germany); 128.36 Ensure stronger coordination between entities dealing with issues relating to children and provide sufficient resources at the national as well as local level, including the provision of temporary shelters (Germany);  128.37 Adopt appropriate public policies to protect and promote children’s rights and to implement the national child protection system in an effective and coordinated manner (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 128.38 Continue guaranteeing solid coordination between institutions responsible for addressing issues regarding children (State of Palestine); 128.39 Continue with its policies of gender equality and equity mechanism in all areas (Bhutan);  128.40 Continue, in line with what is described in its national report, its efforts to provide greater access to education and employment, in order to reduce the conditions for the progression of criminal organizations (Cuba); 128.41 Increase the financial resources allocated to bodies in charge of fighting drugs, alcoholism and drug dependence, in order to curb crime and violence in society (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 128.42 Take necessary measures for the realization of women’s rights in rural and remote areas (Pakistan); 128.43 Pay special attention to the needs of women in rural and remote areas (Rwanda); 128.44 Continue its constructive engagement with civil society in its UPR process and on other human rights issues (Bhutan); 128.45 Develop awareness campaigns on equality and non-discrimination (Chile); 128.46 Put in place measures to eliminate harmful traditional practices and raise awareness for attitudes to change in relation to discriminatory gender roles (Botswana); 128.47 Reinforce efforts to eliminate the discrimination against indigenous children, Afro-descendants, migrants and persons with disabilities (Nicaragua); 128.48 Ensure effective protection against violence and discrimination against women, and implement awareness-raising campaigns about changes in traditional attitudes and discriminatory gender roles (Albania); 128.49 Continue carrying out its efforts to achieve gender equality and tackle discrimination against women in law and practice (Colombia); 128.50 Strengthen its domestic mechanisms, especially towards eliminating acts of discrimination and violence against women and girls (Maldives); 128.51 Step up policies to combat discrimination against women in the labour market, particularly with regard to wage disparities and the concentration of women in low-paid jobs (Paraguay); 128.52 Pursue efforts to combat structural racism and prosecute perpetrators of racist acts (Togo); 128.53 Establish policies and programmes aimed at combating racism, xenophobia and discrimination in the education system (Ecuador); 128.54 Seek to expand its targeted measures to reduce discrimination against persons of African descent and indigenous peoples (Trinidad and Tobago); 128.55 Design awareness-raising campaign on cultural diversity, on countering racial discrimination, xenophobia and all other forms of intolerance and promoting inclusiveness, social cohesion and respect for the values of diversity (Turkmenistan); 128.56 Consider ways to widen and enhance the effectiveness of measures to promote social inclusion and diversity, guaranteeing the full and effective exercise of human rights by indigenous people, persons of African descent, migrants and refugees, and eradicating all forms of racial discrimination, racism and xenophobia (Brazil); 128.57 Undertake policies aiming at combating all forms of discrimination, notably those targeting indigenous peoples (France); 128.58 Intensify public education campaigns to counter structural racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and other forms of intolerance and punish perpetrators of racist acts, taking into account the fact that Costa Rica is a State party to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide and the Rome Statute (Ghana); 128.59 Further intensify its efforts to eliminate structural racism and racial discrimination in all its forms (India); 128.60 Design awareness-raising campaign on cultural diversity and continue its efforts to end discrimination and xenophobia against minorities (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 128.61 Strengthen the measures for indigenous populations and persons of African descent against all forms of discrimination, and ensure their promotion and visibility in society (Niger); 128.62 Continue with its efforts to combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia, as well as set up mechanisms to prosecute perpetrators of racist acts (Pakistan); 128.63 Strengthen measures on combating discrimination against indigenous and migrant children and children with disabilities, as well as investigate all cases of ill-treatment of children by police officers and prison guards (Azerbaijan); 128.64 Intensify efforts to eliminate discrimination against indigenous children, Afro-descendant children, migrant children and children with disabilities (Tunisia); 128.65 Redouble efforts to eliminate discrimination against minority children, including children of African descent and children with disabilities, and improve their socioeconomic conditions as earlier recommended by the Committee on the Rights of the Child (Ghana); 128.66 Step up efforts to eliminate discrimination against indigenous children, Afro-descendant children and migrant children (Guatemala); 128.67 Guarantee the birth registration of all indigenous and migrant children and the issuance of identity documents that would allow them to have access to social services (Honduras); 128.68 Enhance efforts to improve the rate of birth registration among indigenous peoples and other vulnerable groups (Senegal); 128.69 Continue the measures to combat discrimination against LGBTI persons (Argentina); 128.70 Design awareness-raising policies and programmes regarding the prevention of discrimination of LGBT persons and provide equal rights for LGBT persons. In practical terms this means providing better access to justice for people whose rights have been infringed because of their gender identity, gender expression or sexual orientation; it also means allowing same-sex couples to enter into cohabitation contracts in order to remove inequalities relating to inheritance, health care, social security; and finally it means removing discriminatory provisions from the Criminal Code and other laws and regulations (Netherlands); 128.71 Conduct public awareness policies and programmes, in cooperation with civil society, to change cultural paradigms and attitudes in order to encourage and promote respect for LGBTI persons and fight against prejudice and discrimination against LGBTI persons (Slovenia); 128.72 Fight discrimination against LGBT persons both in law and in practice, as it impacts on the possibilities of education, justice and access to health services, with emphasis on the difficulties faced by transgender people (Uruguay); 128.73 Improve prison conditions by reducing overcrowding, improving sanitation, increasing access to medical care, and reducing the incidence of violence among prisoners (United States of America); 128.74 Address overcrowding and harsh conditions in prisons (Australia); 128.75 Take concrete measures aiming at reducing overcrowding in the prisons of the country and ensuring that conditions of detention are in conformity with the human rights of persons deprived of their liberty (Switzerland); 128.76 Continue to take effective measures to improve detention conditions and limit overcrowding in detention centres, including those administered by the migration authorities (Egypt); 128.77 Take further action to improve prison conditions, especially to account for the specific needs of women and children in detention (Germany); 128.78 Take necessary measures to improve the human rights situation of inmates by improving conditions in prison establishments, including by ensuring appropriate infrastructure (Japan); 128.79 Implement measures to improve sanitation conditions and prevent overcrowding in administrative detention centres, especially those under the authority of migration authorities (Mexico); 128.80 Reform the penitentiary system in order to lessen prison overcrowding and ensure the necessary sanitary conditions for inmates, enhance access to medical services and reduce to a minimum and investigate harsh treatment or abuse of authority by prison personnel (Russian Federation); 128.81 Carry on with the implementation of concrete measures to significantly reduce prison overcrowding in Costa Rica, and address the non-separation of minor and adult detainees (Canada); 128.82 Strengthen efforts to address violence against women, including sex trafficking, by improving prevention efforts, providing comprehensive specialized services to survivors, and continuing to investigate and prosecute instances of criminal violence against women (United States of America); 128.83 Continue efforts to fight violence against women and children (Algeria); 128.84 Strengthen its efforts to address the serious and ongoing problem of domestic violence (Australia); 128.85 Provide effective protection against violence and discrimination against women, in line with an accepted UPR recommendation (Egypt); 128.86 Continue efforts to eradicate violence against women (El Salvador); 128.87 Reinforce the fight against domestic violence, by strengthening the administration of justice (France); 128.88 Spearhead public policies, procedures and guidelines with a focus on the comprehensive protection of women from violence (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 128.89 Enhance its efforts to comprehensively address the issue of violence against women by, inter alia, putting in place preventive measures such as education and awareness-raising (Japan); 128.90 Increase efforts to implement the laws on violence against women and to extend the area of influence of the National Institute for Women, providing legal assistance to victims of domestic violence (Liechtenstein); 128.91 Introduce as a crime domestic and intrafamily violence and take the necessary measures to ensure the training of relevant authorities (Mexico); 128.92 Address problems in applying the Violence against Women Act within the courts, towards effectively criminalizing violence against women (Montenegro); 128.93 Further improve the application of the act criminalizing violence against women (Netherlands); 128.94 Intensify its efforts in realizing gender equality through conducting awareness-raising and public educational campaigns with a view to bring about changes in such attitudes, and underlining that all forms of violence against women, including domestic violence, are unacceptable (Norway); 128.95 Criminalize domestic violence (Paraguay); 128.96 Create a national programme to counter violence against women, in particular domestic violence (Russian Federation); 128.97 Continue its efforts to combat gender-based violence to provide a safe living environment for women and girls (Singapore); 128.98 Continue with its efforts to effectively implement the law on criminal sanctions for violence against women and pay special attention to ensuring coordination among institutions providing assistance and support to victims (Slovenia); 128.99 Provide legal assistance and support to victims of domestic violence, including outside of the metropolitan area (Slovenia); 128.100 Allocate sufficient funds for the effective application of the Violence against Women Act (Spain); 128.101 Undertake effective awareness-raising campaigns to address violence against women (Spain); 128.102 Enhance its efforts for the protection of children from all forms of violation including domestic violence and sexual exploitation (Sudan); 128.103 Continue its efforts to eliminate threats, discrimination and violence against women and girls, by improving, inter alia, the implementation by the courts of the law criminalizing violence against women and the availability of legal assistance for all victims of domestic violence (Canada);  128.104 Take steps to expand the provision of legal assistance to victims of domestic violence beyond metropolitan areas (Trinidad and Tobago); 128.105 Expand programmes to eliminate the worst forms of child labour to reach more children in agriculture and children exploited in prostitution (United States of America);  128.106 Strengthen its actions to curb sexual exploitation of children (Bangladesh); 128.107 Take measures to ensure the effective implementation of programmes to protect children’s rights at the local level, particularly as regards violence, commercial sexual exploitation and child labour (Belgium); 128.108 Take steps to prevent violence against children, in particular in school, family and penitentiary environments, and engage effectively in the prosecution of all those involved in such violence (France); 128.109 Strengthen its efforts to combat domestic violence and violence against children and adolescents (Italy); 128.110 Increase efforts to implement the legal framework regarding ill-treatment of children, child labour and sexual exploitation of children (Liechtenstein); 128.111 Step up measures to ensure stronger coordination between agencies dealing with issues relating to children in order to eliminate violence, commercial sexual exploitation and child labour (Malaysia); 128.112 Combat child labour, sexual exploitation and abuse, and further advance strategies to eliminate the discrimination against indigenous, minority children and children of African descent (Sierra Leone); 128.113 Continue efforts to prevent and eliminate child labour and, if necessary, adopt further measures in this area (Slovakia); 128.114 Ensure effective implementation of the act on human trafficking and migrant smuggling and the adoption of appropriate legal, administrative and preventive measures aimed at creating an effective policy and institutional framework for combating the exploitation of persons, especially women and children (Bahrain); 128.115 Continue the actions aimed at fighting trafficking in persons (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 128.116 Strengthen measures to combat trafficking in children, facilitate access to justice and enhance victim protection and assistance in line with the recommendation of the Committee on the Rights of the Child (Botswana); 128.117 Criminalize all forms of trafficking in children, facilitate access to justice and provide compensation for child victims, and enhance victim protection and assistance (Egypt); 128.118 Strengthen measures taken to combat trafficking in persons, in particular children and women (Ethiopia); 128.119 Take measures to ensure the effective implementation of the comprehensive legal framework to combat trafficking in persons and improve assistance to victims of trafficking, especially women and children (India); 128.120 Ensure continuous progress in its efforts to combat trafficking, including through the full implementation of the trafficking in persons act as well as awareness-raising campaigns (Indonesia); 128.121 Strengthen measures for the respect of the rights of the child and protect children against sexual exploitation and illegal trafficking (Libya); 128.122 Take the necessary measures to ensure that the law concerning trafficking is effectively implemented (Montenegro); 128.123 Strengthen efforts to combat trafficking in persons, particularly women and children, including through prevention actions (Morocco); 128.124 Develop a national plan of action to combat trafficking in human beings (Russian Federation); 128.125 Continue efforts to combat trafficking in human beings and reinforce measures to provide adequate assistance to victims (Slovakia); 128.126 Take immediate steps to strengthen measures to protect children from all forms of violence, including trafficking in children (Sri Lanka); 128.127 Continue its efforts in the area of countering trafficking in persons and all associated violations to the rights of the victims (Sudan); 128.128 Combat more effectively the sexual exploitation of children and child labour, by improving the implementation of the February 2013 law against smuggling and trafficking in persons, and by strengthening coordination among the agencies comprising the national coalition against trafficking in persons (Canada); 128.129 Ensure the full prosecution of all forms of trafficking and modern slavery of children so as to deliver on its commitment to eliminate the worst forms of child labour by 2015 and all forms of child labour by 2020, paying particular attention to persons from minority groups and in vulnerable situations (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 128.130 Step up efforts to improve the protection of the rights of women and children, notably by criminally prosecuting those responsible for the violations (Switzerland); 128.131 Strengthen the actions aimed at fighting criminal organizations, drug trafficking and human trafficking (Côte d’Ivoire); 128.132 Intensify efforts to investigate and prosecute perpetrators of child sexual abuse and provide specialized assistance to victims (Australia); 128.133 Strengthen efforts in the fight against trafficking in women and girls as well as the exploitation of prostitution, and harmonize legal procedures concerning prosecution of traffickers (Belgium); 128.134 Intensify efforts to investigate and prosecute cases of human trafficking including forced labour (Australia); 128.135 Ensure that women victims of violence have prompt access to justice and that the acts of violence are adequately prevented, investigated, punished and redressed (Bahrain); 128.136 Consider, in the area of administration of justice, the protection of children and adolescents in juvenile detention centres (Zambia); 128.137 Take further measures to ensure the full enjoyment by children of their human rights, notably regarding the juvenile justice system and cases of child labour (Portugal); 128.138 Consider and address the issue of reportedly high number of children and adolescents in juvenile detention centres by applying child-friendly justice standards and encouraging the use of alternative sanctions and reintegration programmes (Serbia); 128.139 Continue to uphold the traditional values of family life (Bangladesh); 128.140 Step up measures for the protection of the rights of women and girls and take steps to establish and bolster the family regime and strengthen its legal arsenal related to family aspects (Mauritania); 128.141 Improve the national legislation in order to fully ensure freedom of belief, conscience and religion (Russian Federation); 128.142 Continue consulting and involving indigenous people in all debates and decision-making processes with direct impact on them (Romania); 128.143 Adopt special measures to accelerate the full and equal participation in public and political life of women, including women of African descent, as recommended by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (Ghana); 128.144 Take all necessary measures to ensure the full implementation of ILO Convention No. 189, which will come into force in January 2015 (Uruguay); 128.145 Continue to strengthen social policies and programmes targeted to the more needy sectors of the population, to improve their quality of life and ability to enter the labour market (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of));  128.146 Continue to make comprehensive efforts in economic and social development (China); 128.147 Continue to prioritize eradicating poverty and further improving people’s living standards (China); 128.148 Strengthen the implementation of the existing programmes for poverty eradication, especially those directed towards the most vulnerable populations (Colombia); 128.149 Continue the efforts to fight poverty and promote the equal distribution of wealth (Côte d’Ivoire); 128.150 Reinforce ongoing work to guarantee equal social services to all (El Salvador); 128.151 Continue its programmes aimed at poverty alleviation (Philippines); 128.152 Take appropriate measures to address social inequality and disparities by paying particular attention to persons belonging to vulnerable and marginalized groups and providing better access to education, health and employment (Sri Lanka); 128.153 Continue with the measures implemented in favour of the human right to water and sanitation, in the framework of General Assembly resolution 64/292 (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 128.154 Ensure equal access to quality health-care services, including by promoting training and capacity-building of medical personnel and students (Thailand); 128.155 Ensure affordable access to basic health care for all children (Egypt); 128.156 Continue to implement its various programmes to reduce HIV prevalence and to improve access to quality health care by its people (Singapore); 128.157 Develop clear medical guidelines on access to legal abortion (Belgium);  128.158 Introduce effective policies with more resources to reduce the drop.out rate at all school levels (Viet Nam); 128.159 Strengthen measures allowing indigenous communities to have access to education (Bulgaria); 128.160 Incorporate human rights education in school curricula (Bulgaria); 128.161 Reinforce bilingual and intercultural education models for indigenous children and include education on indigenous cultures in the national school curriculum, with a view to promoting respect for diversity (Ireland); 128.162 Consider adopting public policies on ensuring quality education for children and adolescents, and further allocate adequate financial resources to this endeavour, including by focusing on reducing the number of school dropouts (Malaysia); 128.163 Continue to take effective measures to address the very important issue of the realization of the right to education for all (Portugal); 128.164 Continue efforts to facilitate access to education for indigenous communities (State of Palestine); 128.165 Consider including indigenous cultures in the national education plan with a view to promote respect for diversity (State of Palestine); 128.166 Intensify efforts to promote access to education and extend its coverage to all levels of schooling (Ethiopia); 128.167 Adopt policies, programmes and affirmative action measures to improve the quality of education in rural areas, specially those inhabited by indigenous peoples and communities, and guarantee them access to paid employment in the public and private sector (Ecuador); 128.168 Consider developing programmes to reduce school dropout, increasing investment in educational infrastructure, and promoting effective programmes to address low school attendance (Egypt); 128.169 Continue to ensure inclusive education for children and persons with disabilities, as education would allow them to participate more fully in the development of their own communities (Thailand); 128.170 Ensure implementation of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Bahrain); 128.171 Intensify current efforts to improve the exercise of the rights of persons with disabilities (Chile); 128.172 Formulate a national action plan to develop specific initiatives with regard to persons with disabilities (Spain); 128.173 Integrate programmes and projects aimed at benefiting Afro-descendant populations into different development plans (Togo); 128.174 Adopt effective measures to improve the socioeconomic status of indigenous women and children as well as of those of African descent (Uzbekistan); 128.175 Promote and protect the rights of peasants and other people working in rural areas (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 128.176 Implement policies and measures that guarantee fully the human rights of indigenous peoples and improve their living conditions and standards (El Salvador); 128.177 Adopt legislation to recognize and regulate the rights of indigenous populations (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 128.178 Strengthen its efforts to improve the socioeconomic situation of minority children (Turkmenistan); 128.179 Set up effective mechanisms for the recovery of indigenous lands (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 128.180 Deploy further efforts in order to fully involve indigenous peoples in decisions and policies affecting their rights, including those regarding the territories where they live (Italy); 128.181 Take concrete measures to protect the rights and promote the development of indigenous peoples while ensuring their full participation in the decision-making and implementation of policies that affect them (India); 128.182 Continue its efforts for the effective inclusion of indigenous people and migrants in society (Angola); 128.183 Harmonize requirements of legislations on migration to ensure that migrants have access to justice, education, health and safety, regardless of their status (Zambia); 128.184 Ensure that migrants have access to justice, education, health care and safety without discrimination (Brazil); 128.185 Continue making progress in the protection and promotion of the rights of migrants, including the safeguard of the interests of boys, girls, adolescents and women (Colombia); 128.186 Continue its efforts to develop a comprehensive migration policy with a human rights perspective (Trinidad and Tobago); 128.187 Adopt national policies that protect and guarantee the rights of all migrant workers in Costa Rica, in particular to address the needs of women and children (El Salvador); 128.188 Take into account the recommendation of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women to adequately address the situation of migrant and refugee women in the labour market (Nicaragua). 129. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex 
[English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of Costa Rica was headed by H.E. Ms. Gioconda Ubeda Rivera, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs and Worship, and composed of the following members: • H.E. Mr. Manuel B.	 Dengo, Alternate Head of the delegation, Ambassador, Permanent Representative of Costa Rica to the United Nations Office at Geneva; • Mr. 	Christian Guillermet-Fernández, Ambassador, Deputy Permanent Representative of Costa Rica to the United Nations Office at Geneva; • Mr. Norman Lizano, Minister Counsellor; • Mr. Mario Vega, Minister Counsellor; • Ms. Shara Duncan, Advisor to the Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs and Worship. 