Distr.: General 4 April 2014 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-sixth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Cyprus * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.14-13106 *1413106* 
Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–113 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–18 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 19–113 5 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 114–115 16  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 24 Introduction 
1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its eighteenth session from 27 January to 7 February 2014. The review of Cyprus was held at the 13th meeting on 4 February 2014. The delegation of Cyprus was headed by Leda Koursoumba, Law Commissioner. At its 17th meeting, held on 6 February 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on Cyprus. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Cyprus: Republic of Korea, United States of America, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Cyprus: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/CYP/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/CYP/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/CYP/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by the Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Netherlands, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Cyprus through the troika. The questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR). I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The Law Commissioner presented the national report. She underlined that Cyprus attributes great significance to the UPR process as the principal human rights protection mechanism. 6. Since the first review cycle, there had been significant developments regarding compliance by Cyprus with human rights instruments. Many laws had been enacted and policies adopted, and several national action plans had been initiated. Independent control mechanisms had been established by law, such as the National Independent Authority for Human Rights, the Independent Mechanism for the Promotion, Protection and Monitoring of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, and the National Mechanism for the Prevention of Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Independent authorities had been created, such as the Commissioner for Humanitarian Issues, and existing mechanisms such as the Commissioner for Children’s Rights, the Anti-Discrimination Body, the National Machinery of Women’s Rights and the Police Office for Combating Discrimination had further promoted their scope and actions. Cyprus had also transposed a number of European Union (EU) directives. 7. Cyprus had intensified its efforts for closer cooperation with human rights bodies and was now up-to-date with all its treaty reporting obligations. It had ratified, inter alia, the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and was promoting the ratification of the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons, the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence and the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse. 8. Cyprus had introduced important initiatives for the promotion and protection of children’s rights. The Government, in collaboration with the Commissioner for Children’s Rights, had promoted new legislation in compliance with international human rights instruments on children’s rights, particularly the Convention on the Rights of the Child. In collaboration with the competent government authorities, the media, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and civil society, the Commissioner had organized seminars and workshops on empowering children and raising awareness of children’s rights among professionals and society at large. 9. In promoting human rights education, national action plans and projects had been implemented, including multicultural education projects, school curricula reform, measures to combat violence in schools, including bullying, and in-service training for teachers to combat discrimination by promoting tolerance.  10. Regarding women’s rights, Cyprus had consulted widely with women’s organizations in preparation for the restructuring and strengthening of the National Machinery for Women’s Rights. Cyprus was in the process of preparing the new Strategic Plan on Equality 2014–2017 in collaboration with civil society. Within the framework of women’s rights, Cyprus had launched an awareness-raising campaign against trafficking in human beings for sexual and labour exploitation, using the media to disseminate the campaign. More women had been appointed at the decision-making level, and significant efforts had been made to address the issues of labour discrimination and the gender pay gap. The gender pay gap in Cyprus was within the EU average of 16.2 per cent and a special project entitled “Actions for reducing the gender pay gap” had been launched. 11. One of the main priorities for Cyprus was preventing and combating domestic violence. The National Action Plan for the Prevention and Combating of Domestic Violence for the period 2010–2013 aimed to promote concrete policies on a holistic, integrated and systematic basis. 12. Cyprus acknowledged that migration was a major challenge. Within that framework, a series of policy-oriented measures had been adopted, including the signing in December 2012 of a cooperation agreement with the International Organization for Migration (IOM), regular training of staff by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the European Asylum Support Office, reinforcement of the staff at Kofinou Reception Centre, free education for all migrant children and free medical care for all vulnerable groups. Despite budgetary constraints, Cyprus aimed to maintain free access to health care, particularly for vulnerable groups. 13. Increased efforts to combat trafficking in human beings had included the adoption of relevant legislation and a National Action Plan, training of government officials, the abolition of the so-called “artist’s visa”, awareness-raising campaigns and bilateral cooperation with countries of origin. A bill harmonizing domestic legislation with the 2011 EU directive on trafficking in human beings was under consideration by Parliament. 14. Cyprus was sensitive to issues concerning police ill-treatment and use of force. Special training programmes on human rights issues were provided to all police officers. Several independent bodies had been set up to investigate cases of police ill-treatment. Another important development was the cooperation of the police with UNHCR and the Ombudsman in drafting of a code of conduct for checking migrants’ residence status. 15. Prison reform was a high priority for the Government. A programme of short-, medium- and long-term measures had been adopted. Prison leadership and management teams were undergoing considerable restructuring in order to ensure that prison conditions respected inmates’ human rights, in particular their dignity. The prison system was currently shifting from an over-controlling approach to a human rights-based approach. 16. As for the protection of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) people’s rights, a bill criminalizing public incitement to discriminatory, hateful or violent acts against persons because of their sexual orientation or identity was pending before Parliament. Moreover, a bill regulating the civil partnership pact for same and opposite sex couples was currently open for consultation between government agencies and NGOs with a view to its enactment before the end of 2014. 17. Cyprus was determined to take significant measures in the fight against xenophobia. The relevant 2011 legislation criminalized public incitement to violence or hatred by reference to race, colour, religion, descent, and national or ethnic origin, and racist and xenophobic motivations constituted aggravating circumstances. The measures currently being implemented were a “No Hate Speech” television campaign, the drafting of an anti-racist glossary by the Cyprus Youth Organization in cooperation with the Anti-Discrimination Body, and the publication of a policy report for multicultural education, promoting the integration of non-native students. 18. Cyprus noted that, owing to the continued illegal foreign occupation of 36.2 per cent of the territory of the country since 1974, the Government was not in a position to ensure the application of human rights instruments in the area that was not under its effective control. It could not therefore submit reliable information on the enjoyment of the relevant rights by the population living in the occupied area of Cyprus. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 19. During the interactive dialogue, 53 delegations made statements. The recommendations made during the dialogue can be found in section II of the present report. 20. Denmark commended Cyprus for enhancing the rights of migrants, refugees and asylum seekers, despite the fact that holding facilities fell short of international standards. It also commended Cyprus for enabling children of irregular migrants to access education. It appreciated measures to combat human trafficking, but was concerned that the new work permit system failed to detect sexual or labour exploitation. It made recommendations. 21. Djibouti complimented Cyprus on the steps it had taken to fulfil its human rights obligations by ratifying international instruments, which reflected its willingness to cooperate with human rights mechanisms. It made recommendations. 22. Ecuador commended Cyprus for its ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (OP-CRPD), the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict (OP-CRC-AC) and the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (OP-CAT). Ecuador also welcomed the legislative amendments Cyprus had introduced aimed at ensuring equal treatment of men and women in employment and vocational training, and equal pay for work of equal value. It commended the adoption of the National Action Plan for the Prevention and Combating of Domestic Violence. It made recommendations. 23. Egypt welcomed measures to improve employment rights and migrants’ conditions, the ratification of CPRD and OP-CRC-AC, the adoption of legislation on racism and xenophobia and the establishment of an independent police investigation authority. It encouraged Cyprus to continue combating hate speech and incitement to violence and discrimination against migrants and to increase measures to address police violations. It made recommendations. 24. Canada welcomed the proposed amendment to the Criminal Code which would criminalize public incitement of acts against individuals on the grounds of sexual orientation or gender identity and requested an update in that regard. Canada commended Cyprus for action taken to ensure equality between men and women. It made recommendations. 25. France welcomed efforts to implement previous recommendations, including the ratification of CRPD, OP-CRC-AC and OP-CAT. It asked whether Cyprus intended to implement or support anti-xenophobia programmes, including awareness-raising campaigns, and take measures to strengthen ethics training for law enforcement officers and improve administrative and disciplinary oversight of prison management. It made recommendations. 26. Germany asked what steps had been taken to bring asylum procedures into line with international standards, how cooperation with IOM had developed since the conclusion of the December 2012 agreement, and what measures had been taken to enhance the transparency and efficiency of the asylum application process. It also asked how Cyprus intended to increase women’s representation and access to public administration leadership positions. It urged Cyprus to ease regulations for domestic workers and allow more frequent authority inspections. 27. Greece commended Cyprus for its efforts to close the gender wage gap, maintain social security benefits above minimum European and International Labour Organization (ILO) standards, provide training for public officials on identifying and assisting victims of human trafficking and establish mechanisms to facilitate impartial investigations into police misconduct. Cyprus should continue its unwavering support of the Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus in implementing its important humanitarian mandate. It requested more information, particularly on reducing the gender wage gap and financial assistance to victims of trafficking. It made recommendations. 28. Hungary commended Cyprus for its efforts to advance human rights despite the economic crisis and the continued political and territorial division of the island. It noted the recommendations of the Council of Europe on the situation of minorities and the fact that Cyprus had not signed the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness. It welcomed steps to address human trafficking, encouraged continued efforts in that regard and asked for information on planned cooperation in that field. It made recommendations. 29. Indonesia commended the designation of the Office of the Ombudsman as the national human rights institution. It welcomed measures taken to curb domestic violence and guarantee gender equality, particularly the National Action Plan on Gender Equality. It also welcomed the ratification of CRPD. It made recommendations. 30. Ireland noted the concerns of the Committee on the Rights of the Child about the need to establish a juvenile justice system based on a holistic and preventive approach, a national action plan for child victims of trafficking, and protection for children employed as domestic workers. It welcomed efforts to combat discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation or gender identity. It made recommendations. 31. Israel welcomed action taken to promote the equality of women in employment, including the establishment of a gender equality certification body within the Department of Labour Relations to combat the root causes of gender inequality. It made a recommendation. 32. Italy welcomed initiatives to combat abuse and violence, especially sexual violence, against children. It requested additional information on preventive action and support programmes implemented under the National Action Plan for the Prevention and Combating of Domestic Violence. It made recommendations. 33. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic commended Cyprus for its ongoing development and enhancement of its human rights legislation, institutions and monitoring mechanisms. It encouraged Cyprus to continue cooperating with the United Nations, other international organizations and stakeholders to overcome remaining constraints and challenges. 34. Malaysia welcomed measures taken to combat human trafficking and encouraged continued efforts in that area. It applauded the commitment to developing human rights education and awareness. It noted remaining challenges, including in ensuring employment, housing, transport and cultural activities for persons with disabilities and minorities. It made recommendations. 35. Mexico recognized the efforts Cyprus had made in human rights protection and promotion despite the difficulties arising from the division of the country. It noted legal and institutional progress in promoting gender equality and the rights of children and persons with disabilities, and in combating domestic violence, discrimination and human trafficking. It welcomed the establishment of the national human rights institution, the ratification of CRPD and the signing of a cooperation agreement with IOM on improving immigration policy. It made recommendations. 36. Montenegro commended Cyprus for its progress in enhancing human rights legislation, institutions and monitoring mechanisms, not least new legislation and amendments on refugee protection, gender equality, torture, children’s rights and discrimination. It welcomed the Government’s determination to comply with all international human rights instruments to which Cyprus was a party. It asked what steps would be taken to implement the recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women on ratifying Council of Europe conventions on child protection and violence against women. 37. Morocco welcomed the role of the Ombudsman. It encouraged continued efforts to combat human trafficking and exploitation and asked what measures had been taken to train the police to tackle human trafficking networks. It welcomed initiatives to meet the educational needs of vulnerable groups and counter racism and violence in schools. It made a recommendation. 38. The Netherlands noted efforts to promote and protect people’s civil and human rights, particularly LGBT persons. It welcomed the National Action Plan on Gender Equality and other efforts to tackle gender disparities, highlighting the Manual of Interdepartmental Cooperation on Domestic Violence. It encouraged continued efforts in those areas. It made recommendations. 39. Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) noted the efforts of Cyprus in the field of human rights, despite the difficult economic situation, including the launch of a National Action Plan on Gender Equality which addressed a range of themes. It commended Cyprus for signing a cooperation agreement with IOM and for improving capacity-building, technical support and health care on behalf of migrants. It made recommendations. 40. Oman commended Cyprus for its ratification of a number of international human rights instruments and action taken to protect and promote the rights of children and women. It made a recommendation. 41. Paraguay commended Cyprus for its ratification of OP-CAT, CRPD and OP-CRPD as well as its adoption of legislative measures aimed at promoting equal pay for men and women, and combating racism, xenophobia and human trafficking. It was concerned about reports of the adverse effect of the economic crisis on human rights bodies and of increased discrimination against persons of foreign origin. It made recommendations. 42. The Philippines acknowledged the commitment of Cyprus to safeguarding human rights, despite the difficult economic situation. It welcomed the recognition of irregular migrants and their children as a vulnerable group in order to ensure that they had access to public health services. It was encouraged by measures to ensure irregular migrant children had access to public education. It made recommendations. 43. Portugal welcomed the Government’s commitment to implementing a national insurance system and efforts to combat domestic violence, in particular the adoption of a comprehensive legislative framework, research into domestic violence and the provision of specialized training for the police. It made recommendations. 44. The Republic of Moldova requested information on the impact of measures implemented under the national action plans on preventing and combating domestic violence and on integrating third-country nationals legally residing in Cyprus. It asked about the current status of draft legislation on children’s rights. It welcomed measures and legislation to combat human trafficking. It made recommendations. 45. The Russian Federation noted that, despite the very difficult economic situation, Cyprus continued to take vigorous action to ensure full compliance with all international instruments to which it was a party. It made a recommendation. 46. Serbia noted the strengthening of the Cypriot legal and institutional framework for human rights protection and of the Cypriot independent national human rights institutions. It noted reports of the deplorable condition of religious buildings in the northern part of the island and underlined the need to address such issues as an essential element of reconciliation and respect for the human rights of all people, irrespective of ethnicity. It urged Cyprus to cooperate with OHCHR and support visits by United Nations special procedures mandate holders on internally displaced persons, cultural rights, enforced or involuntary disappearances and the right to education. 47. Slovenia welcomed the ratification of OP-CRC-AC and the enactment of legislation making racist motivation an aggravating circumstance in criminal offences. It also noted the recommendation of the Anti-Discrimination Body to introduce legislation against homophobic speech. It made a recommendation. 48. Spain commended Cyprus for its amendment of the Law on Combating of Trafficking and Exploitation of Persons and the Protection of Victims, which had enhanced the protection of workers from third countries. It made recommendations. 49. Sri Lanka welcomed efforts to incorporate human rights in school curricula, including through teacher training on managing diversity and combating discrimination, and the timely new policy on multicultural education. It also welcomed steps to grant free health services, notwithstanding budgetary restrictions, and efforts to protect the rights of migrants, including cooperation with IOM. It made a recommendation. 50. The State of Palestine welcomed the steps taken by the Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance to reduce the wage gap between men and women. It commended Cyprus for taking action to prevent and combat human trafficking, including the provision of training for police officers under the framework of the National Action Plan against Trafficking in Human Beings, which had been achieved despite economic difficulties. It made recommendations.  51. Sweden observed that there was a heightened risk of inequality owing to the economic crisis. Noting reports of violations of the rights of migrants, refugees and asylum seekers, Sweden asked how Cyprus ensured that local authorities and the police respected the basic human rights of those groups. It recalled its advance question on steps taken to protect guest workers, who were at risk of labour exploitation and sexual abuse. It made recommendations. 52. Thailand encouraged Cyprus to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure. It welcomed the recent appointment of the Commissioner for Humanitarian Issues to promote cooperation between the State and religious minority groups, and encouraged the Commissioner to ensure access to education for minorities. It welcomed advances in women’s rights and gender equality, but remained concerned about reports of the trafficking and sexual exploitation of women and inequalities in access to health care. It made recommendations. 53. Bulgaria noted that Cyprus had ratified OP-CRC-AC, that the Ministry of Labour had taken initiatives to reduce the gender wage gap and that the Government had taken steps to ensure access to the labour market for persons with disabilities. It requested further information on policy measures to promote the right to education. It made a recommendation. 54. The United Arab Emirates commended the Government for its determination to continue its coordinated efforts to ensure full compliance with all international human rights instruments to which Cyprus was a party and to safeguard the human rights of all people in Cyprus, notwithstanding the economic crisis. It made a recommendation. 55. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland encouraged Cyprus to guarantee the operational independence and financial autonomy of the Ombudsman. It was concerned about reports about the treatment of prisoners and of discrimination against LGBT persons. It suggested that measures should be taken to enable Turkish Cypriots to participate effectively in cultural, social and economic life and public affairs. It made recommendations. 56. The United States of America, while commending Cyprus for its efforts to address trafficking in persons through cooperation with non-governmental organizations, expressed concern at the lack of a formal mechanism to identify and refer victims to appropriate services. It referred to complaints of exploitation of domestic and agricultural workers, and to reports of some migrants’ difficult detention conditions. It made recommendations. 57. Uruguay welcomed the additional provision in the Criminal Code to the effect that racist motivation constituted an aggravating circumstance and the establishment of a national human rights institution. It made recommendations. 58. Uzbekistan expressed concern about reports of racially-motivated verbal abuse and attacks against foreigners, human rights defenders and Turkish Cypriots, and racist discourse in the media. It also noted the vulnerable situation of older women, women with disabilities and domestic workers, and the pay gap between men and women. It made recommendations. 59. Nicaragua applauded the promulgation of new laws, the implementation of national action plans and the establishment of monitoring mechanisms. It encouraged Cyprus to prevent the challenges stemming from the economic crisis from undermining the protection of human rights. It made a recommendation. 60. Viet Nam commended Cyprus for introducing legislative reforms, establishing national human rights monitoring mechanisms, providing support for minority religious groups and taking action against human trafficking. It made recommendations. 61. Algeria welcomed the ratification of OP-CRC-AC and CRPD. It praised measures taken to ensure equal pay and equal treatment of men and women in employment and vocational training, and encouraged Cyprus to continue amending its Children’s Law. It emphasized the importance of action against racism, racial discrimination, human trafficking and organized crime. It made recommendations. 62. Argentina welcomed the ratification of CRPD, OP-CRPD, OP-CRC-AC and OP.CAT. It commended Cyprus for its Law on Combating Certain Forms and Expressions of Racism and Xenophobia and encouraged it to take vigorous steps to prohibit and punish all forms of discrimination. It made recommendations. 63. Armenia welcomed policies on multicultural education and in support of national minorities. It appreciated the respectful attitude displayed to the Armenian community and Church. It was concerned that the Government was unable to guarantee human rights and protect cultural heritage sites, including those of religious minorities, in the territory beyond the effective control of the Government. It made recommendations. 64. Australia noted that the persistent division of the island inhibited the full enjoyment of all human rights by the entire population of Cyprus. Australia encouraged the leaders of the two Cypriot communities to reach an enduring and just solution to that issue with the assistance of the good offices mission of the United Nations Secretary-General and his Special Adviser on Cyprus, former Australian Foreign Minister, Alexander Downer. Australia expressed concern about the extent of human trafficking, particularly for sexual exploitation and forced labour. It noted the increasing difficulties posed by the management of irregular migration. It made recommendations. 65. Brazil encouraged Cyprus to conclude ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. It welcomed the broadening of the Ombudsman’s mandate, the amendment to the Criminal Code criminalizing public incitement against persons on the basis of their sexual orientation, and the amendments to the Legal Aid Law and the Aliens and Immigration Law. It requested information concerning programmes and policies in support of economic and social rights. It made recommendations. 66. Turkey stated that the Turkish intervention in Cyprus in the wake of the 1974 coup d’état had been fully legal under the 1960 Treaty of Guarantee. 67. Cyprus raised a point of order, indicating that the statement of Turkey contravened the rules of procedures of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review. It requested that all erroneous references be omitted from the report. 68. The President of the Human Rights Council recalled that questions of a political and territorial nature did not fall within the mandate of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, particularly given that such issues were subject to the attention of other bodies that were more competent in those areas. The President invited all delegations to focus on human rights issues and avoid politicizing the debate. 69. Turkey pointed out that the most recent United Nations settlement plan had been approved by the Turkish Cypriots, but rejected by the Greek Cypriot authorities. Turkish Cypriots were deprived of basic human rights, such as communications with the outside world and representation in international forums, and their human rights situation could not be directly communicated to, or observed and reported by, relevant international bodies. Turkish Cypriots in the south were subjected to discrimination, ill-treatment and violence, and were denied the right to religious freedom, freedom of movement and education in their mother tongue. Turkey would continue to support the work of the Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus. 70. Ethiopia encouraged Cyprus to continue considering the introduction of affirmative action and quotas in areas in which women were underrepresented. It welcomed the identification of laws and policies on migrant workers that could be improved. It made recommendations. 71. China welcomed the implementation of the National Action Plan on Gender Equality and the promotion of women’s participation in public and political life. It also commended Cyprus for taking steps to protect vulnerable groups, its ratification of CRPD, its amendment of the Refugee Law to extend the coverage of legal aid and its action against human trafficking. It made recommendations. 72. Colombia welcomed the establishment of the Office of the Ombudsman, the strengthening of national human rights institutions and the steps taken to combat human trafficking. It offered assistance based on its own experiences in various fields. It made recommendations. 73. Côte d’Ivoire welcomed measures to promote gender equality, prevent domestic violence and assist victims, support vulnerable groups and prevent human trafficking. It commended the work of the Police Office for Combating Discrimination, the Commissioner for Humanitarian Issues, and the Supervisory Committee of Prohibited Immigrants Detention Centres. It made recommendations. 74. Cuba commended Cyprus for its numerous legislative amendments and its ratification of international human rights instruments. It welcomed the draft legal norms concerning the welfare and protection of children and the new standards incorporated in school curricula and child welfare programmes. It made a recommendation. 75. Romania praised the establishment of the national human rights institution, the adoption of the comprehensive legal framework for the eradication of discrimination, the promotion of equality between men and women and the ratification of important international human rights instruments. It made a recommendation. 76. Cyprus stated that the Government of the Republic remained fully committed to the objective of achieving a viable and functional settlement, pursuant to United Nations Security Council resolutions. Such a settlement must be based on the framework of a bizonal, bicommunal federation, which would safeguard the human rights of all people in the country. As for the Turkish Cypriots living in the Government-controlled areas of the Republic of Cyprus, the Government ensured their effective participation in economic, social and cultural life to the fullest extent possible. The root cause of the shortcomings in the human rights of Turkish Cypriots was the continuing illegal occupation of part of Cyprus by the Turkish military. 77. Turkey, raising a point of order, noted that the Cypriot delegation seemed to believe that the rules of procedure requiring States not to use the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review as a forum to discuss political issues were not applicable to it. Turkey stated that the 1960 Republic had been based on the political equality of Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots. In December 1963, that partnership had been destroyed and all Turkish Cypriot elements had been removed by force of arms from all State organs. Between 1963 and 1974, Turkish Cypriots had been subjected to all forms of human rights violations and armed attacks by Greek Cypriots. Turkey had intervened in the island in the wake of the coup d’état, which had aimed at the final takeover of Cyprus at all costs. 78. The President of the Human Rights Council recalled that the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review was not a forum for dealing with bilateral matters or political confrontations and implored all parties to abide by the rules of procedure. Debates regarding bilateral or territorial issues were substantive matters and did not constitute points of order. 79. Pakistan, raising a point of order, considered that the intervention by the Turkish delegation and its point of order did not contain any inaccuracy and that it was the sovereign right of every State to express its views. 80. The Russian Federation, raising a point of order, supported the President’s ruling and stated that the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review was not a place for political debate or historical retrospectives. 81. Greece, raising a point of order, indicated that the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review had been convened to review the human rights situation in the Republic of Cyprus and that it was counterproductive to use it to raise political issues. Greece requested that the President ask Turkey to respect the rules of procedure of the UPR and the ruling of the President. 82. Egypt, raising a point of order, supported the President’s ruling and stated that all the States Members of the United Nations should be addressed by their official names, in line with the practices and methods of work of the Human Rights Council and the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review. 83. Armenia, raising a point of order, supported the ruling of the President of the Human Rights Council that a point of order should concern only procedural matters. 84. Cyprus, raising a point of order, reconfirmed that points of order should be concerned with procedural matters only and requested that all political or other erroneous terminology not be included in the record or any other document of the meeting. 85. The President of the Human Rights Council appealed to all delegations to refrain from politicizing in any way or interfering in bilateral or territorial matters, which were being addressed by other competent international bodies.  86. Cyprus explained that Turkish Cypriots were entitled to the full enjoyment of human rights by dint of being citizens of the Republic of Cyprus. The Government took special measures to ensure that those rights, including the rights to employment, education and religious freedom, were properly implemented. Thousands of Turkish Cypriots commuted daily to the Government-controlled area where they worked. They were entitled to social insurance benefits, provided that they made the necessary contributions in accordance with the law. The Government took a series of important measures to support the daily life of Turkish Cypriots. It also provided financial support for the maintenance and restoration of mosques, cemeteries and other Muslims sites. 87. The Government was committed to the reform of the juvenile justice system. The Commissioner for Children’s Rights had prepared a bill regulating prevention and intervention, which was fully compatible with United Nations principles and guidelines. The bill would be submitted for consultation in the near future. 88. Women played an important role in the peacebuilding process through their participation in various working groups and bicommunal structures. 89. The International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance was in the process of ratification and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights was in the process of signature. The ratification of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families was being addressed at European Union level. 90. In recent years, Cyprus had increased its efforts to combat trafficking in human beings by abolishing the so-called “artist’s visa”, adopting anti-trafficking legislation, establishing the National Coordinator and the Multidisciplinary Coordinating Group against Trafficking in Human Beings, developing the 2010–2012 National Action Plan, training government officials and establishing international cooperation with other States. 91. Since the abolition of the artist’s visa and the introduction of a new system with stringent criteria, numerous establishments, primarily cabarets, that employed women who faced an increased risk of sexual exploitation had gone out of business. The new work permit for performing artists required that artists’ qualifications and the establishments that employed them were thoroughly checked. As a result, the risk of trafficking had been significantly reduced, as the number of operational cabarets had fallen from 73 in 2009 to 16, while the number of work permits issued for performing artists at cabarets and nightclubs had dropped dramatically between September 2012 and August 2013 in comparison to previous years. 92. The 2013–2015 National Action Plan against trafficking in human beings established a comprehensive framework for addressing the crime. It had been based on an evaluation of the 2010–2012 Plan and the recommendations of the working groups appointed to that end, and had been approved by the Council of Ministers on 10 April 2013. It took into consideration the provisions of the EU Directive on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings and protecting its victims, the EU Strategy towards the Eradication of Trafficking in Human Beings 2012–2016 and the recommendations of the Council of Europe Group of Experts on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings. The 2013–2015 National Action Plan covered all aspects of the issue, included practical measures and actions to be implemented within specified time frames and provided for the financing of the operations. 93. A person recognized as a refugee received the same treatment as that received by citizens of the Republic, under the relevant laws and regulations. Asylum seekers were protected from refoulement and had full access to housing, employment and social support, as provided by the Refugee Law. National legislation provided that asylum seekers had the right to legal assistance before the Supreme Court free of charge, as required by the relevant EU Directive (2005/85/EC). 94. For Cyprus, any police misconduct, including ill-treatment, racist attitudes and any other inappropriate behaviour, was unacceptable. A series of measures had been adopted to eliminate police misconduct, such as the appointment of a high-ranking officer to address complaints of police misconduct brought by the public and the launch of a website for online complaints submission. The police authorities were currently working in close cooperation with the Ombudsman to prepare a professional code of practice that set out the conditions, means of restraint and basic principles of professional conduct at every stage of police action. Police officers received continuous professional training. 95. The material conditions in police detention centres had recently been assessed by European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and had been found to be satisfactory in many respects. All police detention centres were regularly renovated in order to ensure that they met human rights standards and norms. 96. A number of measures had recently been implemented in an effort to reform the prison system to bring it into full compliance with human rights standards and norms. The Ombudsman had confirmed that those measures would assist in implementing her recommendations. A number of specific steps aimed to improve detention conditions, protect vulnerable persons and provide alternatives to imprisonment. 97. A more individual-oriented policy aimed at improving the well-being of prisoners, providing for school programmes, sports activities and vocational work. Training of prison staff was an important aspect. Special emphasis was given to developing interpersonal communication skills based on respect for human dignity. 98. An Independent Committee appointed by the Council of Ministers had undertaken a fundamental review of the Prisons Law and regulations, particularly the disciplinary system, in line with international human rights instruments and norms and with the case law of the European Court of Human Rights. The project would be completed by the end of 2014. 99. An expert had been methodically reviewing all previously announced or unannounced policy and practice that had not been legislated for, with a view to issuing legislative provisions or protocols as appropriate. 100. The right of foreign workers to equal terms and conditions of employment as those enjoyed by Cypriot citizens was safeguarded through written contracts signed by the employer and the employee. Terms and conditions of employment were in accordance with the relevant collective agreements concluded by employers’ and workers’ organizations. Equal and fair treatment was further strengthened through the 2012 Private Employment Agency Law which regulated the establishment and operation of private employment agencies. In 2013, the Department of Labour Relations had examined 23 labour complaints and forwarded them to the police for further examination and prosecution of the persons responsible. 101. In order to protect the rights of all workers employed in Cyprus, regardless of whether they were Cypriot citizens, EU nationals or non-EU nationals, a complaints mechanism was in operation at each District Labour Relations .ffice. In 2012, the complaints mechanism had been successful in providing relevant advice leading to mutually agreed satisfactory solutions and ongoing employment relationships between 30 workers and their employers. From January to September 2013, 19 such complaints had been resolved, resulting in the preservation of the employment relationship. 102. Cyprus continuously strengthened its efforts to improve the working conditions of all non-EU national workers, which were clearly established in employment contracts. The terms of employment of non-EU national workers in all economic activities were the same as those provided in collective agreements, which safeguarded equal treatment among all workers in Cyprus. 103. All work permit applications submitted by employers were examined by a tripartite committee consisting of representatives of the Department of Labour Relations and workers’ and employers’ organizations. The committee inspectors conducted random inspections at workplaces. 104. Cyprus continuously enhanced its efforts to improve the working conditions of domestic workers, as established in the contracts of employment, which were signed by both parties. 105. The ILO Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189) addressed areas which were largely covered by EU law in the areas of social policy, anti-discrimination, judicial cooperation in criminal matters, asylum and immigration. Cyprus considered that the provisions of the Convention were largely met by national law and practice in that field. In view of the current financial situation in Cyprus, standards that had not already been met could not be fulfilled at that time. Therefore, Cyprus could not yet commit to ratifying that Convention. 106. Cyprus had adopted and was implementing a strategy to combat domestic violence through the pioneering Violence in the Family Laws. The Manual of Interdepartmental Cooperation on Domestic Violence provided a framework on collaboration between professionals and focused on interdepartmental cooperation. 107. Turkish Cypriot students could attend any public or a private school of their choice in the Government-controlled areas; their fees for private schools were fully subsidized by the Government. In the past, Turkish Cypriot parents had expressed their preference that their children attend the public school of their area, indicating that the measures adopted were adequate and students’ educational needs were met. Turkish Cypriot children had the opportunity to receive language lessons in Turkish. Public schools attended by a considerable number of Turkish Cypriot students provided lessons in the students’ own language, religion and culture. 108. Cyprus had been a pioneer in introducing the Law for Education and Training of children with Special Needs in 1999, setting the legislative framework that regulated all matters regarding the education of children with special educational needs who attended public schools. The Law entitled children with special educational needs to “free appropriate public education” alongside their peers and stipulated that the State was responsible for making education and schools fully accessible to them. The inclusion of children with special educational needs in the common core of education was the underlying philosophy and policy of the Ministry of Education and Culture, and was fully aligned with international declarations and tendencies such as the Salamanca Statement and Framework for Action on Special Needs Education. The Commissioner for Children’s Rights, having consulted with stakeholders, had examined the application of the Law and issued a report which she had communicated to the Minister of Education and discussed in Parliament. Her recommendations were being taken into consideration in preparations for amending the current legislation. 109. The Government’s priority was to ensure equal access to education for all children living on the island. To that end, free and accessible education was offered to all pupils without prejudice based on gender, ability, language, colour, religion, political belief or ethnic background. The Policy Report for Multicultural Education promoted an intercultural policy regarding the integration of non-native speaking students with the collection and analysis of data, development of programmes, actions, language courses and teacher training. The aim of the policy was the smooth inclusion of students from all countries in the Cyprus Educational System. 110. Students from national religious minority groups could attend any public or private school of their choice. Whether they opted to attend their national school or another private school, the tuition fees and other expenses were fully subsidized by the Government. The cultural identity of Armenian, Latin and Maronite communities was safeguarded by the implementation of special programmes which were funded by the State. 111. With regard to racism and xenophobia, a multidisciplinary team of experts called the Task Force on School Violence had been established in order to provide immediate support and guidance to schools facing incidents of violence and racism. Through the team’s interventions in schools, vulnerable students received psychological support on a regular basis. Following a recommendation from the Anti-Discrimination Body, the Ministry of Education and Culture was currently drafting a Code of Conduct against Racism in schools, which was expected to contribute to a decrease in bullying and discrimination based on any form of diversity in schools. 112. The Government of the Republic of Cyprus believed that the results-oriented mechanism of the UPR, as well as its monitoring nature, could be seen as a road map for internal assessment and further improvement in compliance with international standards. Cyprus was committed to addressing the new challenges it faced in the field of human rights and to realizing the rights of all people in Cypriot society. 113. The President of the Human Rights Council brought to the attention of the delegations the rules of procedure for the preparation of the reports of the Working Group, according to which the reports were factual and must reflect the interventions made by the State under review and other delegations that took the floor. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations** 114. The response of Cyprus to the following recommendations will be included in the outcome report adopted by the Human Rights Council at its twenty-sixth session in June 2014: 114.1. Ratify the international instruments not yet ratified (Côte d’Ivoire); 114.2. Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Indonesia) (Paraguay); 114.3. Consider favorably ratification of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Algeria); 114.4. Consider the possibility of ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Ecuador); 114.5. Consider the possibility of acceding to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Egypt); 114.6. Sign the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW) (Ethiopia); 114.7. Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness (Uruguay); 114.8. Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and recognize the competence of the Committee (in conformity with articles 31 and 32) (Uruguay); 114.9. Continue efforts aimed at ratifying the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance as well as the principal international human rights instruments to which the country is not yet a party (Argentina); 114.10. Consider ratification of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Spain); 114.11. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the ICESCR; the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Portugal); 114.12. Sign and ratify the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness (Hungary); 114.13. Ratify International Labour Organization Convention No. 189 concerning decent work for domestic workers (Uruguay) (Uzbekistan); 114.14. Ratify soon the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (Italy); 114.15. Consider signing and ratifying the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (Slovenia) 114.16. Facilitate the work and the function of the Ombudsman in accordance with the Paris Principles (Indonesia); 114.17. Ensure the full independence of the Office of the Ombudsman so that it is fully compliant with the Paris Principles (Malaysia); 114.18. Continue advancing the consolidation of its National Human Rights Institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 114.19. Study the measures it considers appropriate to enable the accreditation of the Ombudsman as National Institution of Human Rights, in accordance with the Paris Principles (Algeria); 114.20. Complete the process of consolidation of the National Human Rights Institution and its accreditation to the International Coordinating Committee of National Human Rights Institutions (Mexico); 114.21. Adopt measures aimed at strengthening the Independent National Authority for Human Rights in order for it to be fully compliant with the Paris Principles; in particular, providing it with adequate resources and more qualified staff so as to strengthen the National Preventive Mechanism against Torture and undertake information campaigns, especially among vulnerable groups (Uruguay); 114.22. Continue strengthening the National Machinery for Women’s Rights, conferring on it the authority, visibility and resources necessary to fulfil its purposes (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 114.23. Continue efforts to promote and protect human rights in line with international standards (Oman); 114.24. Take into account the contributions from this Universal Periodic Review and integrate them into the respective national action plans promoted by the Government in various areas of human rights (Nicaragua); 114.25. Step up relevant measures to protect the rights of women, children, persons with disabilities, and migrants (China); 114.26. Continue measures for the protection of the rights of vulnerable groups of the population, particularly women, children, persons with disabilities and elderly persons (Russian Federation); 114.27. Continue undertaking measures to strengthen the legal system in accordance with the international human rights treaties which it has accepted, especially those referring to the rights of children and young people (Cuba); 114.28. Continue the current momentum, national action plans and programmes for effectively addressing challenges and disparities in health care, education, employment, gender equality and social welfare, especially for vulnerable groups of women, children, the elderly and persons with difficulties in the country (Viet Nam); 114.29. Continue efforts to strengthen human rights education in school curricula (Morocco); 114.30. Continue educational reform and the restructuring of the educational system, particularly paying attention towards raising awareness and education on human rights (Armenia); 114.31. Ensure ongoing practical professional training of police officers of all ranks and categories on the protection of vulnerable groups, in compliance with human rights principles (Canada); 114.32. Intensify efforts to further raise public awareness and education on human rights and further strengthen capacity-building for human rights institutions and law enforcement mechanisms (Viet Nam); 114.33. Strengthen the measures to ensure gender equality, as well as to prevent violence against women (Côte d’Ivoire); 114.34. Take further concrete measures to promote equality between men and women by enabling full and meaningful participation by women in the decision-making levels of the formal peace process and the advancement of negotiations regarding the Cyprus issue (Canada); 114.35. Incorporate a gender perspective in negotiating and implementing any settlement accords (Australia); 114.36. Strengthen public policies aimed at the achievement of gender equality in law and in practice, paying particular attention to the vulnerability of elderly women and women with disabilities and especially with respect to access to education, employment and social services (Colombia); 114.37. Continue to pursue the reduction of the gender pay gap (Greece); 114.38. Work on strengthening the implementation, monitoring and enforcement of its existing legal framework protecting the equality of women, particularly in the area of employment, in order to achieve a successful reduction in the wage gap between men and women (Israel); 114.39. Continue on the path of reducing the wage gap between men and women, including by combating the root causes of the gender pay gap (State of Palestine); 114.40. Adopt effective measures for the prevention of any form of racism and discrimination (Uzbekistan); 114.41. Implement measures to combat racial stereotyping and discriminatory attitudes against migrants, including through awareness-raising campaigns and by enforcement of legislation against racial discrimination in all fields of public life (Philippines); 114.42. Strengthen efforts to protect the rights of migrants by combating racial stereotypes and discriminatory attitudes, including through awareness-raising campaigns and by enforcing legislation against racial discrimination in all areas of public life (Brazil); 114.43. Adopt an integrated strategy for the elimination of discrimination on any basis, which deals in particular with racially-motivated attacks against foreigners, persons of African descent and human rights defenders (Colombia); 114.44. Adopt legislative and practical measures towards ensuring equality and equal opportunity in the fields of employment, education, health care and housing for all ethnic groups (Uzbekistan); 114.45. Step up efforts to combat and sanction effectively all forms of discrimination and intolerance, as well as to take additional measures to provide a more adequate response and the required support to the educational needs of the minorities (Hungary); 114.46 Continue actions aimed at the promotion of an environment of tolerance and cultural diversity in order to prevent cases of discrimination in schools (Ecuador); 114.47. Increase awareness-raising programmes and campaigns to promote tolerance and respect for cultural diversity in schools as well as in society (Malaysia); 114.48. Criminalize public incitement of acts against persons on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 114.49. Enact legislation to recognize civil partnership and amend the Criminal Code to explicitly prohibit incitement to hatred, violence or discrimination against persons on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity (Ireland); 114.50. Include a prohibition of discrimination of any kind, including discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity, in areas outside employment, in line with international standards (Netherlands); 114.51. Continue its efforts to improve conditions of detention (Djibouti); 114.52. Develop and employ measures to respect the rights of prisoners, including reviewing the potential for alternative measures for offenders, and detention conditions (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 114.53. Address concerns over migrant detention centre conditions, including by guaranteeing the right to obtain speedy judicial review of the lawfulness of any detention and to be released if detention is determined unlawful (United States of America); 114.54. Conduct an impact assessment on the implementation of its National Action Plan on the Prevention and Combating of Domestic Violence (Portugal); 114.55. Provide further assistance to women victims of violence, in line with the relevant recommendations of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (Portugal); 114.56. Undertake actions to prevent and combat domestic violence and define a date for ratification of the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (France); 114.57. Take measures to guarantee the legal protection of women in cohabitating relationships, as well as those who were previously in such relationships, and provide assistance to women victims of domestic violence through the creation of an adequate number of reception and rehabilitation facilities (Paraguay); 114.58. Intensify efforts in the field of the protection of children, ratify soon the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse, and implement the provisions contained therein (Italy); 114.59. Extend its interdepartmental approach on domestic violence also towards forms of violence outside the family, for example gender-related violence and violence against LGBT people (Netherlands); 114.60. Take all necessary steps to eliminate human trafficking (Australia); 114.61. Persist with its noteworthy efforts to combat trafficking through national and international collaboration (Greece); 114.62. Apply the existing legal dispositions on the combating of discrimination and continue the fight on the trafficking on human beings (Romania); 114.63. Step up efforts aimed at providing adequate assistance and protection to all victims of human trafficking (State of Palestine); 114.64. Provide adequate resources to fully implement its national plan against human trafficking, taking particular attention to curbing trafficking of women and girls (Philippines); 114.65. Continue implementing training programmes of public officers within the framework of the revised National Action Plan against Trafficking of Human Beings (State of Palestine); 114.66. Step up its efforts in bringing to justice perpetrators of trafficking of women and sexual exploitation, as well as ensuring appropriate and timely compensation for victims (Thailand); 114.67. As a source and destination country for men and women who are subjected to forced labour and sex trafficking, improve efforts to prosecute, convict and sentence trafficking offenders (Sweden); 114.68. Adopt more effective anti-trafficking measures and further evaluate measures already in use to limit human exploitation, including efforts to protect victims and to prosecute offenders of human trafficking (Denmark); 114.69. Strengthen trafficking victim protection services by creating and publicizing a victim hotline and training immigration officials so trafficking victims are adequately informed of their rights (United States of America); 114.70. Continue advancing the protection of workers from third countries in Cyprus, including all victims of trafficking and exploitation in the legal aid programme and ensuring the provision of adequate funding for this (Spain); 114.71. Establish an effective mechanism for coordinating the implementation of child rights policy among relevant institutions at all levels and bring the juvenile justice system in line with the Convention on the Rights of the Child and other relevant standards (Ireland); 114.72. Further promote and protect the rights of religious minorities (Armenia); 114.73. Further develop projects concerning relations between different religious and ethnic communities, in line with relevant recommendations of the Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief (Portugal); 114.74. Give full and prompt implementation to those initiatives aimed at promoting an increased involvement of women in politics (Italy); 114.75. Continue to make full efforts to promote its economic recovery and guarantee its citizens their economic, social and cultural rights (China); 114.76. Take all practical measures to prevent the financial crisis that is currently sweeping the nation from affecting citizens’ economic, social and cultural rights, and to provide vulnerable groups in the country, especially the unemployed, with all the support and protection (United Arab Emirates); 114.77. Ensure universal access to health care and services for all women, in particular migrant and elderly women (Republic of Moldova); 114.78. Ensure universal access to health-care services for all, particularly, women, including migrant, disabled and elderly women (Thailand); 114.79. Guarantee protection from discrimination for persons with disabilities, particularly in the fields of employment, housing, transport and cultural and leisure activities (Spain); 114.80. Continue the measures aimed at the improvement of the protection, integration and, in particular, access to education of children with disabilities (Argentina); 114.81. Ensure that children with disabilities are able to exercise their right to education and provide their inclusion in the mainstream education system (Malaysia); 114.82. Ensure that children with disabilities are able to exercise their right to education and provide for their inclusion in the mainstream education system (Bulgaria); 114.83. Improve access to education and health for minorities and ensure non-discrimination in access to employment and accommodation for migrants (Paraguay); 114.84. Step up efforts to protect the rights of migrants (Philippines); 114.85. Enhance the implementation of the laws and regulations of Cyprus in the protection of migrant workers (Ethiopia); 114.86. Further consolidate measures to promote and protect the rights of migrants, including through monitoring mechanisms and awareness-raising of the public (Sri Lanka); 114.87. Initiate an integrated policy for the promotion and protection of the human rights of migrants which takes into account the vulnerable situation of foreign domestic workers (Colombia); 114.88. Continuing strengthening its migration policies in the most effective manner in order to address prejudice, racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and other forms of intolerance (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 114.89. Ensure respect for European and international conventions for the protection of human rights within the framework of treatment of migrants who are affected by the deportation decisions (France); 114.90. Consider applying alternative measures to the detention of unaccompanied migrant children (Egypt); 114.91. Continue to work to address the challenges posed by the increasing flows of irregular migration (Australia); 114.92. Make more accessible and transparent the procedures for granting of residence permits by clarifying the criteria for awarding status, giving reasons for refusal, and improving the information given to foreigners on the remedies available to them (France); 114.93. Adopt the measures necessary to ensure that the issuance of work and residence permits does not depend entirely on employers, so that victims of exploitation are not prevented from obtaining justice (Spain); 114.94. Increase the measures aimed at eliminating corruption in the mechanisms for the processing of residence and work permits for citizens of non-European Union member States (Spain); 114.95. Ensure effective protection against abuse of domestic workers and guarantee their right to just and favourable conditions of work (Republic of Moldova); 114.96. Ensure the rights of migrant workers who are domestic workers, including through measures of labour inspection and protection of these workers against their employer (France); 114.97. Improve oversight of working conditions to prevent labour exploitation, especially in the domestic and agricultural sectors where foreign workers are particularly vulnerable (United States of America); 114.98. Conceive measures to address the phenomenon of the reported increase in labour exploitation, such as by alerting migrant workers, informing migrant workers about their legal rights, and give training to professionals in contact with potential victims (Sweden); 114.99. Take concrete measures to improve the access of irregular migrants to acceptable housing (Denmark); 114.100. Adopt measures that will enable migrants and their children, including irregular migrants, to access social services other than public health care and school education (Philippines); 114.101. Strengthen, in close cooperation with the relevant actors, the capacity to process, care for and house asylum seekers and irregular migrants in conformity with regional and international standards (Mexico); 114.102. Ensure that asylum seekers, while awaiting the reviewing of their status, are protected from refoulement and afforded equal and effective access to essential services (Brazil); 114.103. Ensure that asylum seekers have free legal aid throughout the asylum procedure (Djibouti); 114.104. Improve the mechanisms for the reception of refugees and asylum seekers, ensuring that they are offered psychological and legal assistance, help with languages as well as the opportunity to access employment which corresponds to their professional skills (Spain); 114.105. Adopt the measures necessary to guarantee that the children of internally displaced persons enjoy the same legal status as their parents, regardless of the sex of their parents (Mexico); 115. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. ** The conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. Annex 
[English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of Cyprus was headed by H.E. Mrs. Leda Koursoumba, Law Commissioner, and composed of the following members: • Mr. Andreas Ignatiou, Ambassador, Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission 
of the Republic of Cyprus, Geneva; 
• Mr. George	 Yiangou, Counsellor/Deputy Permanent Representative, Permanent 
Mission of the Republic of Cyprus, Geneva; 
• Ms. Myrianthi Spathi, Second Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Athina Dimitriou, Expert in Detention Matters, Minister’s Officer, Ministry of 
Justice and Public Order; 
• Ms. Maro Michaelide, Adviser Officer, Ministry of Interior; • Mr. Andreas	 Tsiakkiros, Officer at the Primary Education Director’s Office, 
Ministry of Education and Culture; 
• Ms. Natalia 	Andreou Panayiotou, Adviser Officer for International Relations, 
Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance; 
• Ms. Maria Sologianni, 	Advisor, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Cyprus, 
Geneva. 
