  United Nations  A/HRC/28/16    General Assembly  Distr.: General 24 December 2014  Original: English  Human Rights Council Twenty-eighth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   Egypt Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–165 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–33 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  34–165 6  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  166–167 13  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  31   Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its twentieth session from 27 October to 7 November 2014. The review of Egypt was held at the 15th meeting on 5 November 2014. The delegation of Egypt was headed by Ibrahim el-Heneidy, Minister for Transitional Justice and Parliamentary Affairs. At its 18th meeting, held on 7 November 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on Egypt. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Egypt: Côte d’Ivoire, Montenegro, Saudi Arabia. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Egypt: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation prepared in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/EGY/1);  (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/EGY/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/EGY/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, the Czech Republic, Finland, Germany, Liechtenstein, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Egypt through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR).  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The head of the delegation of Egypt, Ibrahim el-Heneidy, Minister for Transitional Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, expressed appreciation for the constructive role of the UPR mechanism. The preparation process for Egypt’s second review provided a further opportunity for communication with national and public forces and civil society. 6. Since the first review of Egypt, in 2010, the country has witnessed major political and social changes. In the past three years, Egypt has witnessed two popular revolutions that have transformed the political landscape. The driving force behind those revolutions was a call for the protection of the rights of Egyptian citizens and for guaranteeing their freedoms. In this light, the demands of the Egyptian people have gone beyond the recommendations that Egypt received and accepted during its first review. 7. On 25 January 2011, Egypt witnessed a popular peaceful revolt against a ruling authority that had led the country into an atmosphere of political and social marginalization. The new president, elected in 2012, adopted a series of exclusionary policies and authoritarian practices, disseminated hate speech and incited the commission of violence, thus violating the rule of law and the rights of Egyptians.  8. The Egyptian people started another revolution on 30 June 2013, with the participation of about 30 million Egyptians. Political and popular forces agreed on a national road map that encompassed constitutional reform, presidential and parliamentary elections.  9. The Committee of the Fifty, a body comprising representatives of Egyptians from all walks of life, drafted a new amended Constitution that was passed by a popular vote of 98.1 per cent, including an unprecedented participation by women. Following presidential elections held in May 2014, a new President was appointed by a popular vote of over 96 per cent. Preparations are also under way for holding parliamentary elections, the final step in the road map. 10. The Ministry of Transitional Justice and Parliamentary Affairs is responsible for all aspects relevant to human rights in Egypt. It observes types of violations and marginalization and works on ensuring accountability and reparations to victims of violations. 11. In upholding the principle of accountability, the President of Egypt formed in 2013 an independent fact-finding commission to investigate acts of violence following the 30 June revolution. The commission has finalized its work and is in the process of preparing its reports to submit to the competent authorities. 12. Among the first of the President’s decisions was the formation of a high committee for legislative reform tasked with reviewing the legislative edifice in order to align it with the new Constitution. The Committee has already prepared a number of draft laws to address core human rights issues. 13. The 2014 Constitution in its article 5 lists human rights among the foundations of the State’s political system. It stipulates that discrimination and incitement to hatred are crimes with no statute of limitations. It further committed the state to achieving social justice. Citizenship, equality and equal opportunity form the basis of the relationship between the individual and the State. It has stipulated rights and freedoms unprecedented in previous Egyptian constitutional systems, for example, the right to peaceful strike, and has released controls over the freedom of belief. Personal freedom is ensured as a natural right, as are the freedoms of movement, thought, opinion, artistic and literary creativity, press and publishing. The Constitution prohibits forced arbitrary displacement. It ensures the rights to form political parties, civil associations and organizations upon notification. The Constitution further dedicates several articles to addressing the rights of women, children, persons with disabilities, older persons and expatriates. 14. In 2010, Egypt received a total of 165 recommendations. It accepted 119 of them, of which 25 were under implementation at the time of the review. Despite the pressing domestic issues, the steps below have been taken to implement the accepted recommendations.  15. A number of inter-agency governmental consultations have been held with civil society representatives to hear their views on the human rights situation. 16. The Government issued a number of decisions and laws since 2011 during the transitional period to implement its international legal obligations in the field of human rights. The most important ones include tightening punishments for crimes of violence against women, establishing a health insurance system for women heads of families and children under the school age and regulating the right to public assembly and peaceful demonstrations. 17. The law regulating political parties was amended in 2011 to allow for the establishment of political parties upon notification. Political parties are not to be dissolved except upon a court order. Those regulations led the number of registered political parties to surge to 96.  18. The Al-Azhar and the Coptic Orthodox Church of Egypt launched the “House of the Egyptian Family” initiative to reinforce the values of citizenship for all. The House of the Egyptian Family launched, in cooperation with civil society partners, a campaign to restore 46 churches that had been affected by acts of violence following the June 30 revolution. 19. The Constitution and laws do not impose any limitations on access by bloggers or the public to the Internet. Presidents of national newspapers are appointed upon nominations by the newspapers themselves. The ministry of information has been abolished. Steps are under way for establishing a council for media regulation in accordance with the Constitution. 20. Since 2011, the Government has been involved in a review of Law no. 84 of 2002 regulating civil associations and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). The total number of registered NGOs now stands at around 47,000, compared with 26,000 in 2010. 21. The Egyptian Constitution stipulates that “torture in all forms and types is a crime that is not subject to prescription,” and that “the State shall guarantee fair compensation for the victims of such violations”. The Office of the Public Prosecutor investigates all cases brought to its attention on claims of torture or harsh treatment. It is also responsible for the surveillance of prisons and other places of detention and regularly undertakes surprise visits. 22. Despite the scale of violence and barbaric acts committed by terrorist organizations in Egypt and the Middle East, Egypt works to ensure the highest possible guarantees for the respect for human rights. It has opted not to apply any exceptional measures while fighting terrorism, instead relying on the stipulations of the Penal Code, which provides guarantees for citizens’ rights. The draft anti-terrorism law, which encompasses all the guarantees laid out under United Nations standards, is ready for adoption.   23. The Government has specified a minimum standard of living for those living in poverty and extreme poverty. The family social security pension has been raised by 50 per cent.  24. Egypt designed a comprehensive housing strategy for the period 2012-2027 that aims to provide housing to limited-income families, women breadwinners, persons with disabilities and others. A law on social housing has been issued.  25. A new ministry has been established responsible for civil development and slums, and another for small and medium-sized enterprises. National strategies to address unemployment and eradicate illiteracy are being implemented. 26. The Law on the House of Representatives stipulates that at least 50 per cent of electoral lists must be women, as well as at least 50 per cent of appointed representatives. Women government employees enjoy total equality with men.  27. In coordination with the National Council for Women, the Government has provided support to women living in poverty, with the aim of facilitating their access to State services. The Government has also established “women health centres” in most governorates. 28. In June 2014, legal sanctions against harassment were tightened by way of amendments to the penal code. Those amendments include, for the first time, a broad and detailed definition of sexual harassment. The Ministry of the Interior provides centres for care and treatment of women victims of rape and those subjected to violence. A female police force is routinely assigned to deal with those cases. 29. The 2014 Constitution establishes children's rights in a manner that is unprecedented in previous Egyptian constitutions in terms of the scope, level and areas of protection for children, including children with disabilities. The State provides all types of comprehensive care to children through care units across the country, nurseries, shelters and alternative families.  30. The National Council for Persons with Disabilities was established in 2012, with supervisory and coordination roles. The Council was represented in the Committee of the Fifty, which was responsible for amending the Constitution. The new Law on the House of Representatives specified an appropriate representation of persons with disabilities in Parliament. A database on persons with disabilities has been finalized in order to provide required care and services. 31. On 4 November 2014, Egypt submitted to OHCHR a draft agreement for the establishment of a regional office for North Africa in Cairo.  32. Regarding cooperation with Human Rights Council mechanisms, the Government issued in March 2014 invitations to a number of Council mandate holders, including the Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence. 33. Education curricula include information on human rights and freedoms. International human rights law has become a standing subject in university curricula. The Government provides financial support to civil society organizations that work in the field of human rights on awareness-raising, and a new department on human rights and social communication has been established at the Ministry of the Interior.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 34. During the interactive dialogue, 121 delegations made statements. The recommendations made during the dialogue can be found in section II of the present report. 35. The Russian Federation welcomed the amended Constitution and efforts on interreligious dialogue. 36. Rwanda commended efforts on the rule of law and the development of a road map. 37. Saudi Arabia commended efforts to implement the road map. 38. Senegal welcomed the re-establishment of political stability and the amended Constitution. 39. Serbia encouraged continuing efforts for the protection of children’s rights. 40. Sierra Leone encouraged ensuring free birth registration for all. 41. Singapore commended efforts to restore stability and noted steps to address violence against women. 42. Slovakia hoped for broader involvement by stakeholders in the national report of the next UPR.  43. Slovenia noted the ratification of the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, and the signing of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. 44. South Africa welcomed the enactment of legislation to meet international obligations. 45. South Sudan welcomed the implementation of the road map. 46. Spain recalled that terrorism should be combated while respecting human rights and without the use of the death penalty. 47. Sri Lanka welcomed the bill to combat terrorism without prejudice to rights and freedoms. 48. The State of Palestine welcomed the establishment of the Ministry of Transitional Justice. 49. The Sudan welcomed initiatives to strengthen the values of citizenship and spreading tolerance. 50. Sweden expressed concern about legislation targeting NGOs, human rights activists and journalists. 51. The Czech Republic welcomed the delegation. 52. Tajikistan welcomed the inclusion of a section on human rights in the amended Constitution. 53. Thailand commended recognition in the Constitution of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights. 54. Togo welcomed the reinstatement of constitutional order and initiatives for national reconciliation. 55. Tunisia encouraged efforts on violence against women and to prohibit corporal punishment of children. 56. Turkey regretted that the Assembly Law was used to stifle political opposition. 57. Turkmenistan commended strategies to tackle unemployment and provide housing. 58. Ukraine welcomed cooperation with OHCHR and steps to ensure that Egyptians abroad could vote. 59. The United Arab Emirates stressed that Egypt was on the right path for consolidating the rule of law. 60. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland expressed concern about mass trials and trial irregularities. 61. The United States of America expressed concern about violations of fundamental freedoms. 62. Uruguay encouraged Egypt to ensure that human rights defenders could work effectively. 63. Uzbekistan commended cooperation with human rights mechanisms. 64. Argentina welcomed efforts to provide decent housing.  65. Viet Nam noted efforts to empower women and combat human trafficking and terrorism. 66. Yemen commended the pursuit of a policy of transitional justice.  67. Zimbabwe commended measures to safeguard economic, social and cultural rights, particularly on illiteracy. 68. Afghanistan applauded Egypt’s willingness to host an OHCHR regional office. 69. Algeria welcomed measures to support economic, social and cultural rights. 70. Angola commended progress in economic, social and cultural rights, particularly regarding housing. 71. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela commended improvements to social protection programmes. 72. Armenia welcomed the promotion of dialogue between religions and protection of children’s rights. 73. Australia welcomed commitment to building a democratic rules-based society. 74. Austria expressed concern regarding restrictions to freedom of assembly and regarding the excessive use of force. 75. Azerbaijan commended efforts to promote dialogue between religions. 76. Bahrain commended the new Constitution and the legislation adopted in compliance with international obligations. 77. Bangladesh commended legislation to ensure gender equality and action on health care.  78. Belarus noted Egypt’s success in implementing the recommendations of the first cycle. 79. Minister Tellawy of the Egyptian delegation explained that Egyptian women played a crucial role during transitional phases, noting that the Constitution of 2014 refers to women's rights in some 20 articles, including on women's rights to hold leadership positions, equality in the workplace, protection from violence and provisions for financial, social and health support to vulnerable and poor women. Since June 2013, additional measures have been adopted to ensure that women are protected by law and in practice. Notably, Egypt is about to adopt a new law on violence against women; has criminalized violence against women in the Penal Code; is considering the adoption of a national strategy on violence against women; has established a special unit at the Ministry of the Interior to deal with issues related to violence against women; has created a hotline for complains; and set up some 32 different units to ensure gender equality in the workplace. A number of national programmes have also been developed to fight illiteracy among women and facilitate their integration in the workforce. Egypt has also criminalized female genital mutilation. Despite these actions, women still face several challenges, particularly social and cultural difficulties that were negatively reinforced during the rule of the Muslim Brotherhood, which attempted to change or abolish many acts of legislation that had been adopted in favour of women. Egyptian women expected international support during this difficult time, yet several countries supported the Muslim Brotherhood. 80. Ambassador Hisham Badr noted that engagement with civil society was a key pillar in the political and social transitional process, and that civil society was a natural partner for the Government. He said there were 47,000 NGOs in Egypt, working without any interference or restrictions, and that the right to freedom of assembly and association were enshrined in the new Constitution, which provided for the establishment of NGOs by notification, forbade any intervention in their affairs and confined their dissolution to a court order. A new association law, to be adopted by Parliament, was being discussed with civil society organizations, of which 800 had been consulted so far. On 26 October, the Ministry of Social Affairs announced that it would facilitate the registration process of unregistered NGOs. The High Committee on legislative reforms was currently studying a number of laws, including a transitional justice law, a law on the Statute of the National Council for Human Rights, the establishment of a high commission for equality, the definition of torture in line with the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT), an electoral law and a draft law on unions.  81. Belgium encouraged Egypt to continue to strengthen its Constitution to provide greater protection. 82. Bhutan commended parliamentary elections and measures to protect women. 83. The Plurinational State of Bolivia noted Egypt’s strategies on housing and to combat unemployment. 84. Bosnia and Herzegovina commended the creation of the Ministry of Transitional Justice. 85. Botswana commended progress regarding the rights of women, human trafficking and legislative reform. 86. Brazil enquired about Egypt’s intention to ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and the optional protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). 87. Brunei Darussalam commended initiatives on education, especially to eradicate illiteracy. 88. Burkina Faso commended Egypt’s efforts, particularly to protect civil and political rights. 89. Burundi commended Egypt’s policy to provide human rights education at all levels. 90. Cabo Verde commended the process to align legislation with the Constitution and international standards. 91. The Central African Republic welcomed Egypt’s return to constitutional order and implementation of a social policy. 92. Chile was pleased that Egypt was considering withdrawing reservations to international human rights instruments. 93. China welcomed measures regarding employment, the rights of women, children, refugees and migrants. 94. The Congo commended cooperation with the different United Nations mechanisms and programmes on human rights. 95. Costa Rica commended efforts to combat illiteracy and to promote women’s participation in the political sphere. 96. Côte d’Ivoire commended ratification of several international human rights instruments.  97. Croatia encouraged Egypt to implement the human rights provisions enshrined in the Constitution. 98. Cuba hailed the new Constitution as a qualitative change conducive to improving the human rights situation. 99. Cyprus welcomed measures to safeguard the rights of women, children and religious minorities.  100. Switzerland noted that Egypt had experienced a difficult period in the previous four years. 101. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea commended progress in the empowerment of women. 102. The Democratic Republic of the Congo welcomed the lifting of the state of emergency. 103. Denmark expressed concern regarding alleged torture and ill-treatment by security forces. 104. Djibouti appreciated the participatory process undertaken in the drafting of the National report. 105. Equatorial Guinea welcomed the adoption of the amended Constitution. 106. Eritrea noted Egypt’s efforts to protect human rights. 107. Estonia encouraged Egypt to extend a standing invitation to special procedures. 108. Ethiopia welcomed laws to combat violence against women and corruption. 109. Finland expressed concern about the treatment of civil society and human rights organizations. 110. France welcomed the importance afforded to fundamental freedoms in the amended Constitution. 111. Gabon commended measures to tackle illiteracy and provide adequate housing. 112. Germany asked how ill-treatment in detention was prevented and how due process was ensured. 113. Ghana commended the People’s Assembly Act, which allocated seats in the Assembly to women. 114. Greece asked for information on the public consultation for the bill on NGOs. 115. Hungary noted developments regarding gender equality and due process. 116. Iceland welcomed the provision in the amended Constitution to combat violence against women. 117. The Egyptian delegation stated that, regarding the arrest of protesters, the right to protest is enshrined in article 73 of the Constitution. A protest law was adopted in November 2013 in compliance with article 19 of ICCPR. Decisions to arrest, detain and further convict protesters are made by ordinary courts in line with national legislation and after thorough investigations. Those arrested have either not notified the relevant authorities of their intended demonstration or used violence. The protest law is being reviewed by the Constitutional Court. Defenders were sentenced for committing offenses punishable under the Penal Code and are entitled to appeal. No one is detained for his or her opinion or for exercising the right to freedom of expression. The General Prosecutor is currently investigating the events of July and August 2013. Findings will be released as soon as the investigations are over.  118. The death penalty is restricted to very serious crimes. It is served after consultation with the Grand Mufti and in all cases after referral to the Court of Cassation. The President is entitled to issue a pardon.  119. There is no torture in prisons and the national authorities, along with the National Council for Human Rights, are overseeing places of detention and interrogation centres so as to ensure the proper conditions are provided to all prisoners. All allegations of torture and ill-treatment are investigated, and perpetrators are brought to justice. Torture is a punishable crime.  120. India appreciated steps towards democracy and adequate representation of women in parliament.  121. Indonesia appreciated efforts to eradicate illiteracy and strengthen links with civil society. 122. The Islamic Republic of Iran commended Egypt’s participation in the UPR process.  123. Iraq commended the establishment of the Committee for institutional reform. 124. Ireland called for the implementation of the rights set out in the Constitution. 125. Israel recognized counter-terrorism efforts and expressed concern about violence in Egypt’s Sinai Peninsula. 126. Italy urged Egypt to review mass death sentences and ensure defendants receive fair trials. 127. Japan noted political normalization and the Constitution’s protection measures for women and children. 128. Jordan welcomed the amended Constitution, which enshrines new rights and freedoms. 129. Kazakhstan welcomed the adoption of the new Constitution and hoped it would be followed by concrete steps. 130. Kuwait commended the inclusion of human rights guarantees in the amended Constitution. 131. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic commended efforts with regard to unemployment and housing. 132. Latvia noted Egypt’s amended Constitution that contained extensive human rights guarantees. 133. Lebanon commended the constitutional provisions concerning freedom of belief and women’s rights. 134. Lesotho commended achievements in the socioeconomic, civil and political spheres. 135. Lithuania commended the improved human rights guarantees in Egypt’s amended Constitution. 136. Luxembourg reiterated its support for Egypt’s transitional process. 137. Malaysia recognized efforts to restore political stability but was concerned by discontent. 138. Canada commended Egypt’s amended Constitution and efforts to move towards democracy. 139. Mali was pleased with cooperation with procedures and mechanisms to promote human rights. 140. Mauritania welcomed Egypt’s willingness to host the OHCHR North Africa Regional Office. 141. Mexico noted Egypt’s adoption of a law to promote gender parity in parliament and presidential appointments. 142. Montenegro was concerned by mass death sentences and doubted that such sentences could have positive results. 143. Morocco commended harsher penalties for violence against women and promotion of dialogue between religions. 144. Mozambique commended cooperation with the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and children. 145. Myanmar noted legislative and administrative measures to empower women and persons with disabilities. 146. Namibia commended the implementation of recommendations made during the previous UPR. 147. The Netherlands expressed concern at the shrinking space for civil society. 148. Nicaragua welcomed changes aimed at promoting human rights and the rule of law.  149. The Niger commended strategies to promote the best interests of the child. 150. Nigeria called for continued action to guarantee freedom of expression, association and assembly. 151. Norway called for the speedy implementation of the new Constitution in law and in practice. 152. Oman welcomed the constitutional provision requiring Egypt to abide by its international obligations. 153. Pakistan noted efforts to promote women’s rights through empowerment, social services and action against discrimination. 154. Paraguay requested information on action taken to eliminate forced and early marriage. 155. The Philippines recognized progress and urged Egypt to take into consideration concerns of civil society.  156. Portugal encouraged Egypt to ensure protection of fundamental rights. 157. Qatar emphasized the importance of aligning national legislation with the provisions of the Constitution. 158. The Republic of Korea commended Egypt’s implementation of the road map. 159. Romania encouraged Egypt to press ahead with the major changes introduced since the 2011 revolution. 160. Maldives called for the implementation of constitutional amendments, including combating discrimination against women. 161. The Egyptian delegation stated that, despite the deteriorating security situation owing of terrorism, including the killing of 517 policemen, Egypt had not taken any exceptional measures. For instance, it had not adopted a law on terrorism.  162. The delegation said that the Egyptian authorities were fully committed to the principles of accountability and the rule of law. All allegations of human rights violations and crimes were investigated, so as to ensure that perpetrators were brought to justice. A code of conduct for police officers had been adopted.  163. The delegation said that all trials took place according to due process and international norms of fair trials. 164. The delegation said that there was no international consensus on the abolition of the death penalty. ICCPR does not prohibit the death penalty, but sets conditions for applying it. Egypt respects and complies with all restrictions on the death penalty and ensures due process. The death penalty is preserved in around 50 countries. Those countries send correspondence every year to the Secretary-General, in which they stress their need to preserve the death penalty given their cultural, political and legal specificities.  165. Egypt is considering ratifying additional international treaties.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**  ** Conclusions and recommendations will not be edited. 166. The following recommendations will be examined by Egypt, which will respond in due course, but no later than the twenty-eighth session of the Human Rights Council in March 2015: 166.1 Sign the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (ICCPR-OP2) (Turkey); 166.2 Consider ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Rwanda); 166.3 Ratify ICCPR-OP2 and abolish the death penalty (Portugal);  166.4 Ratify ICCPR-OP2 (Sierra Leone); Ratify ICCPR-OP2 (Chile);  166.5 Consider ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (OP-CAT) (Gabon);  166.6 Ratify the Rome Statute of the ICC (Chile); Ratify the Rome Statute of the ICC (Estonia); Ratify the Rome Statute of the ICC (Slovenia); Ratify the Rome Statute of the ICC (Tunisia); Ratify the Rome Statute of the ICC (Uruguay);  166.7 Ratify the OP-CAT (Chile); Ratify the OP-CAT (Czech Republic); Ratify the OP-CAT (Sierra Leone); Ratify the OP-CAT (Switzerland); Ratify the OP-CAT (Togo); Ratify the OP-CAT (Tunisia);  166.8 Ratify the Optional Protocol to CAT (Austria); 166.9 Withdraw its reservations to CAT (arts. 21 and 22) and ratify OP-CAT without reservations (Portugal); 166.10 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (ICPPED) (Sierra Leone); Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (ICPPED (Togo); Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (ICPPED) (Tunisia);  166.11 Ratify ICPPED (Portugal); 166.12 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Chile); Ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Gabon); Ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Niger); Ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Uruguay);  166.13 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Niger); 166.14 Review and withdraw reservation to articles 2 and 16 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) (Slovenia); 166.15 Withdraw its reservations to CEDAW and ratify the Optional Protocol to CEDAW (Ghana); 166.16 Consider the withdrawal of reservations to CEDAW Convention (Latvia); 166.17 Consider withdrawing its reservations on the CEDAW articles 2 and 16 , accede to the Optional Protocol to CEDAW (OP-CEDAW) and consider taking the requisite measures as the upper guardian of its citizen’s rights, freedoms and interests by eliminating all forms of discrimination against women in decision-making and public life (Namibia); 166.18 Review the personal status legislation and the Penal Code in order to modify or delete articles that discriminate against women, to comply with the Constitution, as well as international law, and work to lift the reservation on article 16 of CEDAW (Sweden); 166.19 Strengthen measures, including the adoption of necessary legislation, to give effect to the rights enshrined in ICCPR (South Africa);  166.20 Continue to ensure its compliance with its human rights obligations, especially those enshrined in ICCPR and other human rights agreements to which it is a state party (Philippines); 166.21 Continue efforts to harmonize national legislation with international norms (Sudan); 166.22 Adapt global human rights conventions in consonance with domestic statutes (Nigeria); 166.23 Promote the process of revising her current laws with a view to ensuring their conformity with the new Constitution and to better protecting and promoting human rights (Viet Nam); 166.24 Continue to work for the adoption of appropriate legal frameworks for the implementation of the guarantees foreseen by the new Constitution regarding human rights and fundamental freedoms (Angola); 166.25 Continue the process of legislative review to promote and protect all human rights (India); 166.26 Continue to take measures to strengthen the institutional and legal framework for the protection of human rights (Uzbekistan); 166.27 Take steps to establish a National Human Rights Institution in full compliance with the Paris Principles (Ghana); 166.28 Maintain its efforts towards strengthening the national institutions working in the area of the protection and promotion of human rights (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 166.29 Establish a national rapporteur’s office dedicated to implementing and coordinating policies and programmes (Israel); 166.30 Continue efforts to promote good governance, political dialogue and actions in favour of peace (Senegal); 166.31 Apply the road map on political rights through the holding of legislative elections (Sudan); 166.32 Pursue efforts to promote and protect human rights (Algeria); 166.33 Continue further improvement of the protection and promotion of human rights in the country (Azerbaijan); 166.34 Continue together finding the path back to the place where the full respect for human rights can be found (Malaysia); 166.35 Consider developing Human Rights Indicators, as suggested by OHCHR, as a fundamental tool for the realization of human rights (Portugal); 166.36 Continue to implement voluntary pledges and commitments towards the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms (Qatar); 166.37 Continuing efforts aimed at promoting awareness of the culture of human rights in the society (South Sudan);  166.38 Pursue its cooperation with national councils and civil society organizations (Equatorial Guinea);  166.39 Continue strengthening frameworks of cooperation between law enforcement apparatuses and civil society, in order to have further meaningful dialogue to address all relevant human rights challenges in the country (Indonesia); 166.40 Take further steps to ensure the promotion of the values of tolerance, dialogue and mutual understanding at the local level (Kazakhstan); 166.41 Promote dialogue between all sides to foster understanding and unity (Malaysia); 166.42 Continue to promote and enhance interaction and dialogue between the competent national authorities and the civil society organizations (Cyprus); 166.43 Continue to adopt legal and administrative measures to combat corruption (Russian Federation); 166.44 Continue the efforts to combat corruption in the framework of legislative, administrative and political reform programmes (Saudi Arabia); 166.45 Promote the right to development through, inter alia, enhancing national efforts aimed at combating corruption (South Sudan); 166.46 Bring domestic legislation in line with international norms in the fight against corruption (Bahrain); 166.47 Take measures towards greater harmonization between national legislation and the United Nations Convention against Corruption (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 166.48 Continue ensuring that national efforts aimed at combating corruption include the consolidation of the principles of transparency and accountability (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 166.49 Continue its efforts to combat corruption, including through a framework of legislative and administrative reforms (Cuba); 166.50 Continue policy to empower women and children (Algeria); 166.51 Continue to implement measures towards the rights of youth and encourage voluntary initiatives and charity work for the promotion of these rights (Saudi Arabia); 166.52 Continue the implementation of measures aimed at promoting the enjoyment of human rights by youth (Sri Lanka); 166.53 Expand social programmes for the promotion of youth employment (Uzbekistan); 166.54 Make more efforts to create job opportunities for youth by taking the necessary measures (Oman); 166.55 Continue the promotion and protection of children’s rights (Armenia); 166.56 Strengthen and coordinate the efforts of all institutions at the national level to ensure the protection of the Egyptian Diaspora (Iraq); 166.57 Submit overdue reports to the relevant treaty bodies (Sierra Leone); 166.58 Submit its reports to the Human Rights Committee and Committee against Torture (Ghana); 166.59 Speed up the establishment process of a regional office of OHCHR in Cairo (Tunisia); 166.60 Extend a permanent invitation to all special procedures mandate holders (Tunisia); Extend a permanent invitation to all special procedures mandate holders (Turkey); 166.61 Issue a standing invitation to all special procedures (Ghana); 166.62 Facilitate the visits of all special procedures that have, to date, requested a visit (Switzerland); 166.63 Enhance its cooperation with the Human Rights Council and its mechanisms by responding favourably to outstanding requests from Special Rapporteurs to visit the country (Hungary); 166.64 Strengthen cooperation with the special procedures of the Human Rights Council by responding positively to the pending visit requests and eventually consider extending a standing invitation to all the special procedures mandate holders (Latvia); 166.65 Invite and set dates for visits by the Special Rapporteurs on the situation of human rights defenders, on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association, and on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression (Norway); 166.66 Continue its full cooperation with the Human Rights Council and its mechanisms (Burkina Faso); 166.67 Explain clearly relevant facts and circumstances to address concerns expressed by United Nations human rights mechanisms (Japan); 166.68 Continue its cooperation with the United Nations and other international organizations (Lao People’s Democratic Republic); 166.69 Fully cooperate with the special procedures mandate-holders (Lithuania); 166.70 Continue to work with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights to set up the regional office (Qatar); 166.71 Step up measures to eliminate discrimination against vulnerable groups, especially women (Ghana); 166.72 Pursue and strengthen actions to bring to an end discrimination against women (Senegal); 166.73 Implement a national plan of action that would abolish traditional practices and stereotypes that consequently widen the gender gap (Serbia); 166.74 Intensify its efforts to ensure absolute equality of rights and opportunities of women and girls vis-à-vis men and boys, according to international norms (Uruguay); 166.75 Step up efforts to ensure non-discrimination and equality between men and women in all spheres of Egyptian society (Angola); 166.76 In compliance with international human rights law, amend, adopt and effectively implement legislation to eliminate all forms of discrimination and criminalize all forms of violence against women and girls; ensure that all cases of sexual violence and harassment faced by women protesters and human rights defenders must be promptly investigated and the perpetrators brought to justice (Finland); 166.77 Intensify efforts to empower and improve the status of women in society and adopt additional measures to eliminate all forms of discrimination against women, promote their literacy, ensure equal treatment and safe environment for women in the workplace and combat gender-based violence (Thailand); 166.78 Enhance its efforts to support social rights for women, such as the right to education and health (Turkmenistan); 166.79 Continue to provide support to women in the economic sphere (United Arab Emirates); 166.80 Continue with the policy of promoting and protecting the rights of women, in accordance with the Constitution of 2014 (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 166.81 Ensure equal access of girls and women to all levels and fields of education (Afghanistan); 166.82 Continue to uphold the State policies aimed at promoting and protecting women’s rights in line with its 2014 Constitution (Bangladesh); 166.83 Strengthen legislative and administrative measures on discrimination and violence against women (Botswana); 166.84 Continue its efforts to ensure the empowerment of women in the economic, health and social perspectives, including the integration of women as well as the establishment of women's health centres, to ensure the promotion and protection of women’s rights in the country (Brunei Darussalam); 166.85 Continue its policy to empower women and respect and protect their rights, including the fight against female genital mutilation (Burkina Faso);  166.86 Continue to strengthen the empowerment of women in all areas of public life (China); 166.87 Keep its attention towards the economic empowerment of women (Cuba);  166.88 Continue programmes and policies for the economic empowerment of women (India); 166.89 Continue economic empowerment of women (Mauritania); 166.90 Continue promoting equitable representation of women in the Parliament and Government (Ethiopia); 166.91 Enhance parliamentary representation of women in accordance with the new Constitution (Greece); 166.92 Keep on its national efforts aimed at ensuring the empowerment of women (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 166.93 Continue the current policies for the promotion and protection of women’s rights in accordance with human rights guarantees included in the new 2014 Constitution (Jordan); 166.94 Take appropriate steps to amend regulations that discriminate against women (Latvia); 166.95 Continue the promulgation and enactment of laws to combat discrimination against women (Lebanon); 166.96 Continue to update and develop strategies to combat discrimination against women (Nicaragua); 166.97 Continue measures for the promotion and protection of women’s rights in particular in the workplace (Morocco); 166.98 Sustain efforts aimed at ensuring equitable work opportunities for women (Myanmar); 166.99 Put forward more efforts to eliminate all forms of violence and discrimination against women and to ensure greater women’s empowerment, representation and advancement in all sectors to comply with the new Constitution (Republic of Korea); 166.100 Abolish the death penalty for those under 18 years (Paraguay);  166.101 Consider establishing a formal moratorium on executions of persons sentenced to death (Argentina); 166.102 Consider the introduction of a moratorium on the application of the death penalty (Romania); 166.103 Take the necessary measures to establish a moratorium on executions (Spain); 166.104 Impose an immediate moratorium on all death sentences (Turkey); Establish a moratorium on the application of the death penalty with a view to its abolition (Togo); Establish a moratorium on the use of the death penalty in view of its abolition (France); Announce a moratorium on the death penalty with a view to its eventual abolition. Pending abolition, its application should be limited (Germany); Reinstate a moratorium on executions with a view of abolishing the death penalty (Hungary); 166.105 Establish a moratorium on the death penalty (Australia); 166.106 Establish a moratorium on the death penalty (Luxembourg); 166.107 Establish a moratorium on executions (Italy);  166.108 Establish an official moratorium on executions with the view to abolishing the death penalty (Switzerland); 166.109 Declare a moratorium on the death penalty until its complete abolition (Uruguay); 166.110 Issue an immediate moratorium on the use of the death penalty, particularly in instances of mass trials (Montenegro); 166.111 Commute the sentences of persons sentenced to death and establish a moratorium on executions (Portugal); 166.112 Harmonize the definition of torture in their national legislation with the internationally accepted definition as outlined in the Convention against Torture (Slovenia); 166.113 Adopt in its Penal Code the definition of torture in article 1(1) of the United Nations Convention against Torture (Australia); 166.114 Amend article 126 of the penal code in conformity with CAT (Nigeria); 166.115 Consider amending article 26 of the Penal Code to criminalize torture in line with article 52 of the new Constitution adopted in 2014 (State of Palestine); 166.116 Establish a mechanism making mandatory independent visits to all places where persons may be deprived of their liberty, including all military or national security facilities (Switzerland);  166.117 Ensure that all detained persons are protected by law and physically against torture and all other ill-treatment in accordance with its obligations under the Convention against Torture (Switzerland); 166.118 Ensure that all detainees are protected from torture or other ill-treatment and that detention conditions meet the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners and the Basic Principles for the Treatment of Prisoners (Denmark); 166.119 Prosecute and punish possible crimes committed by security officers, especially the practice of torture (Spain); 166.120 Appropriately investigate excessive use of force by security forces, publically release findings, and prosecute those identified as being responsible (United States of America); 166.121 Carry out investigations, in accordance with international norms, regarding the perpetrators, police or military, of the violence which resulted in serious injuries or deaths during demonstrations and as appropriate bring those responsible to justice (Belgium); 166.122 Investigate allegations of torture and ensure access to effective remedy for victims (Botswana); 166.123 Ensure the effective respect of the constitutional prohibition of torture (France); 166.124 Enforce the ban that does not allow confessions obtained through torture or other unlawful methods to be used as evidence (Uruguay); 166.125 Ensure that the defence and security forces act in accordance with international human rights norms regarding the use of force (Central African Republic); 166.126 Ensure that the security forces act in accordance with human rights laws and international norms on the use of force, and investigate allegations of abuse committed by them (Chile); 166.127 Ensure that the security forces act in accordance with international human rights norms on the use of force and do not carry out arbitrary detentions (Costa Rica);  166.128 Grant immediate release and enforceable right to compensation to remedy the arbitrary detention of Israeli citizen, Mr. Ouda Tarabin, imprisoned for over 14 years (Israel); 166.129 Increase the number of female police officers and consider placing them in decision-making positions (Bahrain); 166.130 Increase the number of women in law enforcement agencies, including the police department (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 166.131 Strengthen human rights training and awareness-raising programmes for the police (United Arab Emirates); 166.132 Extend its human rights education and awareness programme to target more public service officials (Zimbabwe); 166.133 Establish trainings for police officers on children’s rights, to ensure that these act appropriately towards child victims or delinquents (Belgium); 166.134 Promote further human rights education and training for law enforcement agents (China); 166.135 Develop efficient programmes designed to enhance the human rights knowledge of law enforcement officials (Ethiopia); 166.136 Increase education programmes and awareness-raising of police officers in the field of human rights (Morocco); 166.137 Develop programmes aimed at promoting the awareness of law enforcement officials on human rights values and principles (Pakistan); 166.138 Implement effectively the instrument of pretrial detention on exceptional basis (Slovakia); 166.139 In accordance with article 54 of its Constitution, stop using the preventive detention orders by prosecutors as a measure to punish or to prolong the incarceration of activists and protestors (Netherlands); 166.140 Continue working on the reform and improvement of prisons and detention centres in accordance with international norms on this issue (Nicaragua);  166.141 Ensure that persons with disabilities enjoy their rights in detention centres (Bolivia (Plurinational State of));  166.142 Guarantee the rights of detainees with disabilities by providing them with separate detention facilities (Jordan); 166.143 Ensure the enjoyment by people with disabilities of their rights while in detention premises (Myanmar); 166.144 Provide guarantees for the effective investigation and prosecution of the cases of violence against women (Russian Federation); 166.145 Intensify efforts to ensure gender equality and eliminate sexual and gender-based violence, including through considering development of a national action plan on implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) (Rwanda); 166.146 Establish measure to effectively address discrimination and violence against women and girls (Sierra Leone); 166.147 Continue to ensure the effective implementation of measures such as the establishment of telephone hotlines and care centres for victims of violence, as well as harsher penalties for violence against women and, if necessary, introduce further practical policies to prevent all forms of violence against women, and to support the victims of such abuse (Singapore); 166.148 Adopt comprehensive measures to address violence against women, including a law criminalizing all forms of violence against women (Slovenia); 166.149 Strengthen measures to combat sexual assault and violence against women and girls (South Africa); 166.150 Ensure effective accountability for perpetrators of violence against women (Sri Lanka); 166.151 Further intensify efforts to promote gender equality, to combat sexual harassment and gender-based violence through a comprehensive legislative reform and the adoption of a national strategy, and recognize the important work and competence of NGOs in this field (Sweden); 166.152 Continue efforts aimed at the elimination of all forms of violence against women (Ukraine); 166.153 Complete the National Strategy on Violence against Women with a clear credible implementation plan and invite the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences to visit Egypt (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 166.154 Adopt comprehensive measures to address violence against women and girls (Afghanistan);  166.155 Adopt a comprehensive national strategy to fight all forms of violence against women, including women rights defenders, both on the public and the domestic level, especially sexual harassment (Brazil); 166.156 Adopt the draft law on the fight against violence against women (Central African Republic); 166.157 Continue efforts to fight against sexual harassment and violence against women, including by increasing the number of police units and personnel specialized in this fight (Côte d’Ivoire); 166.158 Promote its efforts to combat violence against women and realizing further equality between women and men (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 166.159 Take legislative and enforcement measures to eliminate all forms of violence against women, including to withdraw Egypt’s reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Estonia); 166.160 Implement the Egyptian strategy to combat violence against women (France); 166.161 Criminalize domestic violence against women, ratify the Optional Protocol to CEDAW (Germany); 166.162 Adopt comprehensive measures to address violence against women and girls, including criminalizing all forms of violence against women (Ghana); 166.163 Intensify its efforts to prevent violence against women, protect survivors and prosecute perpetrators (Iceland); 166.164 Amend the Penal Code and other national laws criminalizing all forms of violence against women and domestic violence and rape in particular, and implement laws in practice (Lithuania); 166.165 Strengthen the measures to effectively fight violence against women (Mali); 166.166 Take steps to put in place legislative and enforcement measures designed to eliminate all forms of violence against women, including sexual violence against women participating in protests and demonstrations (Montenegro); 166.167 Continue to promote efforts exerted in the area of combating sexual harassment (Pakistan); 166.168 Abolish child early forced marriage and the temporary commercial marriage of girls and ensure eradication of female genital mutilation (Sierra Leone); 166.169 In collaboration with the international community, intensify efforts to combat human trafficking (Rwanda); 166.170 Broaden the understanding of the definition of trafficking and to mainstream a human-rights based approach in dealing with policies directed towards eliminating trafficking in persons (Slovenia); 166.171 Ensure the effective implementation of the National Plan of Action against Human Trafficking (Israel); 166.172 Continue its national efforts aimed at combating trafficking in persons, including through international and regional cooperation (Kazakhstan); 166.173 Ensure the establishment of a nationally integrated database on trafficking in persons (Philippines); 166.174 Continue to strengthen efforts to eliminate human trafficking, in accordance with the national plan of action (Maldives); 166.175 Strengthen measures to eradicate economic exploitation of children and to amend the national Labour Code to bring it into conformity with International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention No. 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour (Serbia); 166.176 Elaborate a comprehensive and multidisciplinary strategy to prevent and address exploiting young citizens through illegal migration (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 166.177 Improve significantly the respect of the right to due process, in accordance with article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Belgium); 166.178 Guarantee the right to fair trial and ensure that civilians are tried in civilian courts at all times (Czech Republic); 166.179 Ensure fair, equitable and independent judicial procedures, in accordance with international standards (France);  166.180 Ensure compliance with its international obligations on the right to a fair and timely trial based on clear charges and independent investigations, respecting the right of access and contact to lawyers and family (Ireland); 166.181 Undertake the necessary reforms to guarantee defendants a fair trial within a reasonable time, and reduce the use of remand (Luxembourg); 166.182 Ensure that trials and pretrial detention comply with due process rights in ICCPR and articles 54 and 55 of the Constitution, and end all military trials of civilians (Norway); 166.183 Ensure due process of law for detainees, because a fair and independent judicial system is a fundamental pillar of a future democratic and stable Egypt (Canada); 166.184 Take measures to ensure due process and fair trials, particularly in any proceeding that could entail the application of the death penalty (Mexico); 166.185 Continue the cooperation with OHCHR to receive technical assistance in the strengthening and guarantee of the independence of the judiciary, ensuring access to justice for all citizens (Mexico); 166.186 Urgently review the Presidential decree expanding the role of military courts with a view to ensuring fair trial guarantees and limiting the jurisdiction of military courts (Austria); 166.187 Investigate all cases of the use of excessive force against protestors by the security forces and hold accountable those responsible for the incidents, stop the practice of military trials of civilians (Lithuania); 166.188 Ensure the transparency, effectiveness, impartiality and independence in the processes of investigation of human rights violations (Uruguay); 166.189 Make public, so as to ensure transparency, the conclusions and recommendations of the different national fact-finding commissions (Belgium); 166.190 Continue efforts to combat impunity for serious violations of human rights committed during the events of 2011 and 2013 (Argentina);  166.191 Take necessary steps to ensure that individuals suspected of committing crimes under international law and other civil and human rights violations are thoroughly investigated and brought to justice (Lesotho); 166.192 Ensure thorough, independent and impartial investigations into the mass killings in Raba’a Square in 2013 and make the perpetrators accountable (Iceland); 166.193 Continue its efforts to ensure the success of transitional justice and national reconciliation in order to promote and protect human rights (Yemen); 166.194 Continue the policy on the protection and support of the family institution as a fundamental basis of society (Russian Federation); 166.195 Continue to pursue social policies upholding the institution of family unit in line with the traditional family values and socioeconomic aspirations of its people (Bangladesh); 166.196 Continue, in line with the international obligations, to provide support to the family as the natural and fundamental unit of society, including by adopting, when necessary, relevant legal measures at the national level (Belarus); 166.197 Encourage initiatives aimed at promoting respect and religious tolerance and cultural diversity (South Sudan); 166.198 Continue its activities to serve a better understanding between all people and religions (Azerbaijan); 166.199 Strengthen protection of the rights of religious minorities, in particular the conditions for the exercise of freedom of worship, and put an end to all impunity for violations of these rights (Cabo Verde); 166.200 Continue to encourage and support initiatives and activities to promote religious respect and tolerance (Cuba); 166.201 Launch social dialogue to improve religious discourse emphasizing the positive values and bright example of the Egyptian religious heritage (Jordan); 166.202 Continue to encourage community initiatives for religious dialogue (Morocco); 166.203 Continue to encourage the initiatives aimed at disseminating the values of respect and religious tolerance in the community (Oman); 166.204 Promote societal dialogue aimed at developing religious discourse supportive of the values of tolerance, social cohesion and mutual understanding (Pakistan); 166.205 Ensure the respect for freedom of religion or belief for all its citizens (Romania); 166.206 Strengthen the freedom of expression and the media so that all journalists can carry out their activities freely and without intimidation and those imprisoned in connection with their work can be released without delay (Czech Republic); 166.207 Stop limits on Constitutional rights of peaceful assembly and freedom of expression and release all those imprisoned for exercising their constitutional rights, including media representatives (Estonia); 166.208 Amend the Penal Code to implement the guarantees of freedom of thought, of the press and of publication enshrined in the 2014 Constitution (Australia); 166.209 Take necessary measures to enhance the enjoyment of the freedom of expression (Brazil); 166.210 Effectively guarantee the exercise of freedom of expression, association and peaceful assembly and, in this context, ensure that the law regulating demonstrations in Egypt complies with its commitments under the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Luxembourg); 166.211 Review penal code restricting freedom of opinion, enact legislation and recognize independent unions as well as remove restrictions to peaceful demonstrations (Lithuania); 166.212 Guarantee an environment conducive to the work of journalists, human rights defenders and civil society organizations (Tunisia); 166.213 Respect freedom of opinion and expression, in particular for journalists, and freedom of peaceful demonstration, without recourse to the excessive use of force (France); 166.214 Revise the penal code in order to guarantee the freedom of expression and protect journalists from violence and harassment (Germany); 166.215 Release those detained solely for exercising rights to freedom of expression or for membership in a political group, and ensure remaining detainees full fair trial guarantees on an individual level (United States of America); 166.216 Release and drop charges against all journalists and media workers arrested in the context of performing their duties (Austria); 166.217 Immediately release all imprisoned journalists, prisoners of conscience and human rights defenders (Norway); 166.218 Take all the necessary measures to protect journalists and human rights defenders from threats and attacks, and ensure that the perpetrators of such violence are brought to justice (Luxembourg); 166.219 Ensure that freedom of expression is safeguarded in all its forms, including artistic expressions (Norway); 166.220 Respect the freedom of association and assembly of its citizens (Romania); 166.221 Ensure that the legislative framework guarantees the full enjoyment of freedom of expression and association (Mexico); 166.222 Amend the Act No. 107/2013 on the Right to Public Meetings and Peaceful Assemblies (Slovakia); Review all laws on public assemblies including the Law No. 10 of 1914 on gatherings and the Law No. 107 of 2013 on public meetings to align them with Egypt’s international human rights obligations (Canada); 166.223 Repeal or amend the Demonstration law (Law 107 of 2013), and the civil society law (Law 84 of 2002), which restrict freedom of assembly, association and expression, to be consistent with Egypt’s international obligations (United States of America); 166.224 Protect freedom of assembly by immediately repealing the Protest law, or amending it so that it is in accordance with article 73 of the 2014 Constitution and with ICCPR (Australia); 166.225 Review the Law on Associations and the Protest law, in order to comply with the Constitution, as well as international law, and immediately release persons detained or imprisoned for exercising their freedom of expression through participating in peaceful protests (Sweden); 166.226 Repeal or amend without delay the Assembly Law of November 2013, with a view to guarantee the right to free assembly and freedom of expression (Turkey); 166.227 Modify Law 107 on the Rights to Public Meetings, bring it in line with international standards (Austria); 166.228 Revise the law regulating the right of public assembly by, inter alia, specifying the prohibited conduct and repealing excessive sanctions to ensure better compliance with international standards (Italy); 166.229 Protect the freedom of assembly, enshrined in the Constitution, by modifying the protest law to allow public assemblies through a simple notification process (Germany); 166.230 Amend the protest law on the Right to Public Meeting, Processions and Peaceful Demonstrations in accordance with article 73 of the Constitution guaranteeing freedom of assembly (Netherlands); 166.231 Protect freedom of assembly and association by revising the Protest Law, eliminating all interference with the registration and work of NGOs and guaranteeing their right to seek and receive funding, and halting the ultimatum for unregistered NGOs (Norway); 166.232 Prepare and adopt the law affirming the right to establish non-governmental organizations merely upon notification (Slovakia); 166.233 Reorient the new NGO law to allow the full exercise of the right to freedom of association for both domestic and international organizations, with autonomy and without risk for their continuity (Spain); 166.234 Adopt the new law on NGOs to fully guarantee to the civil society a set of rights in conformity with international standards (Italy); 166.235 Facilitate the work of civil society actors by removing excessive requirements for their registration, operation and funding and aligning the Law on Associations with the Constitution (Czech Republic); 166.236 Ensure full implementation of the Constitution’s provisions for the free operation of civil society, including through a revised NGO law that conforms to international standards and protects freedom of expression (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 166.237 Enact an NGO law that allows international and national human rights NGOs to operate without interference in line with international standards (Austria); 166.238 Lift the restrictions hindering the work of civil society organizations, in particular the reception of funding to effectively carry out their work in defence of human rights (Chile); 166.239 Implement actions to facilitate the work of civil society, including through legislative measures (Costa Rica); 166.240 Adopt the legislation facilitating the work of NGOs in a way that will promote human rights and benefit the overall political process in Egypt (Croatia); 166.241 Bring the draft bill on NGOs into line with international norms and the Egyptian Constitution (Iceland); 166.242 Retract the draft legislation on civil society organizations, which threatens their independence by enabling the Government to dissolve them without a court order or refuse to license new organizations on grounds, including “national unity” (Ireland); 166.243 Amend the law of association in compliance with international standards, including allowing NGOs to function without impediments such as prior authorization, funding control and administrative dissolution (Denmark); 166.244 Expeditiously enact a new NGO law in line with the new Constitution which will grant legal personality to NGOs upon notification (Republic of Korea); 166.245 Fully implement its international obligations to ensure the protection of human rights defenders and other civil society actors while exercising their human rights, including the freedoms of expression, association and assembly (Finland); 166.246 Respect the free exercise of the associations defending human rights, ensure that the Egyptian legislation complies with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and guarantee the right to freedom of association (France); 166.247 Protect the freedom of association, in accordance with the Egyptian Constitution, by adopting a new NGO law fully in line with international standards and best practices, including on foreign funding (Germany); 166.248 Ensure amendments to the Law 84 of 2002 are consistent with Egypt’s Constitution and Egypt’s international obligations (Canada); 166.249 Refrain from stigmatizing and criminalizing the work of NGOs, human rights defenders and journalists (Norway); 166.250 Give due consideration to ensuring a safe and enabling environment for civil society (Japan); 166.251 Improve the quality of the electoral process and ensure implementation of recommendations of Election Observation Missions, especially with regard to equal political participation of women, participation of independent election observers, respect for freedom of assembly and expression and revision of campaign finance regulations (Czech Republic); 166.252 Hold parliamentary elections as early as possible (India); 166.253 Increase monitoring and regulate domestic work (Senegal); 166.254 Consider amendments to its Labour Code to cover and protect domestic workers and prohibit exploitative form of domestic work (Philippines); 166.255 Strengthen professional training to promote the rapid integration of young graduates into the labour force (Senegal); 166.256 Effectively implement the comprehensive national strategy to combat short- and long-term unemployment, including investment in skills development (South Africa); 166.257 Strengthen the efforts to ensure equal labour opportunities for women (State of Palestine); 166.258 Continue to work to ensure equal rights for women in the workplace through its institutions, norms and public policies (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 166.259 Take measures to reduce unemployment, especially among young people, and promote their integration into the social and political life of the country, with the goal of maintaining and enhancing its stability and security (Tajikistan); 166.260 Continue with its efforts to combat short- and long-term unemployment, in consultation with the private sector and the providers of education (Bhutan); 166.261 Continue implementing its comprehensive national strategy aimed at combating short- and long-term unemployment (Equatorial Guinea); 166.262 Strengthen the national legislative framework to fight illiteracy, reach the integral development of all segments of the population and regions, improve the standard of living of its citizens, including vulnerable groups of the population, and provide housing and other economic and social rights (Tajikistan); 166.263 Ensure the participation of all stakeholders, particularly women, youth and vulnerable groups, in the country’s economic development, so as to foster an inclusive long-term economic growth and well-being for all (Thailand); 166.264 Continue the practice of implementing socially orientated programmes (Turkmenistan); 166.265 Intensify programmes to enhance economic, social and cultural rights (Algeria); 166.266 Continue to promote the right to social security and adequate standard of living for its people (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 166.267 Intensify its efforts towards the realization of economic, social and cultural rights, including in relation to the right to health (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 166.268 Continue with its efforts to reduce poverty, in particular, to increase its focus on anti-poverty programmes in rural areas (Bhutan); 166.269 Exert further efforts towards the realization of economic, social and cultural rights, including through strengthening its social protection measures (Kazakhstan); 166.270 Continue to devote efforts to the promotion of economic, social and cultural rights (Nicaragua); 166.271 Continue and strengthen the actions for the improvement of the living condition of its population (Mali);  166.272 Intensify its efforts to ensure the establishment of the housing strategy 2012-2027 (Equatorial Guinea);  166.273 Take concrete measures to guarantee access to safe drinking water and sanitation for all, particularly for those in rural areas (Maldives); 166.274 Continue efforts to ensure universal access to quality education and health care (Uzbekistan); 166.275 Continue its various programmes to enhance the people’s right to education, especially in the eradication of illiteracy, by cooperating with the specific governorates, civil society organizations as well as other international organizations (Brunei Darussalam); 166.276 Continue its efforts to ensure the realization of the right to education for all with a special emphasis on the promotion of women (Eritrea); 166.277 Make further efforts to eradicate illiteracy for all, including through, inter alia, sufficient budget allocation (Indonesia); 166.278 Continue efforts in the education system to ensure access to education for all segments of the society (Oman); 166.279 Further expand human rights education and training programmes in the country (Armenia); 166.280 Continue to support people with disabilities to participate in decisions about their fundamental rights (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 166.281 Continue creating conditions for the participation of persons with disabilities in the country’s public life and in decision-making regarding matters concerning the implementation of their rights (Belarus); 166.282 Strengthen national bodies responsible for ensuring the protection of persons with disabilities against all forms of violations and to promote their full integration into society (Côte d’Ivoire); 166.283 Increase the opportunities for persons with disabilities to express their opinion (Kuwait); 166.284 Continue efforts to guarantee the rights of persons with disabilities, and improve their social integration (Lebanon); 166.285 Promote tolerance and protect minorities and vulnerable groups (Senegal); 166.286 Address gaps in the protection of migrants rights (Nigeria); 166.287 Intensify and carry forward its efforts for combating illegal migration and effectively addressing its dangerous ramification (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 166.288 Further strengthen efforts in the area of preventing and combating illegal migration, including through high-risk sea boats (Greece); 166.289 Address legal gaps regarding illegal migration (Kuwait); 166.290 Enact laws and measures necessary to complement the Government’s efforts concerning migration (Myanmar); 166.291 Urge business enterprises and the private sector to participate in the process of comprehensive human development, based on the principle of corporate social responsibility, including through voluntary and philanthropy initiatives (Sri Lanka); 166.292 Disseminate and expand the understanding of the concept of social responsibility of the capital and encourage businessmen and the private sector to contribute to a comprehensive human development process, including through voluntary initiatives and charity work (United Arab Emirates); 166.293 Exert greater efforts to promote corporative social responsibility of private enterprise, encouraging them to promote voluntary initiatives that contribute to human development of the Egyptian people (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 166.294 Encourage the private capital to contribute to the national development process through the funding of charity work (Iraq); 166.295 Step up the efforts to combat all forms and manifestations of terrorism and extremism (Russian Federation); 166.296 Step up the efforts to combat terrorism in all its forms (Saudi Arabia); 166.297 Accelerate the adoption of the bill on the respect of human rights in the fight against terrorism (Burkina Faso); 166.298 Make all possible efforts to speed up the adoption process of the law to combat all forms of terrorism (Burundi); 166.299 Pursue the fight against terrorism in compliance with human rights (France); 166.300 Ensure the anti-terrorism measures in line with full respect for fundamental human rights while combating terrorism (Republic of Korea). 167. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English only]   Composition of the delegation The delegation of Egypt was headed by H.E. Judge Ibrahim el-Heneidy, Minister for Transitional Justice and Parliamentary Affairs and composed of the following members: • H.E. Amabassador Hesham Mohamed Mustafa Badr, Assistant Foreign Minister for Multilateral Affairs and Secretary General of the National Committee for the UPR; • H.E. Ambassador Amr Ramadan, Permanent Representative of the Arab Republic of Egypt to the United Nations Office at Geneva, the World Trade Organization and Other International Organizations in Geneva; • H.E. Mervat Mehanna Ahmed Tallawy, President of the National Council for Women; • Major-General Abu Bakr Abdel Karim, Assistant Minister of the Interior for Human Rights; • Judge Medhat Salah El Din Bassiouny, Assistant Minister of Justice for Human Rights; • H.E. Ambassador Dr. Mahy Hassan Abdel-Latif, Deputy Assistant Foreign Minister for Human Rights and NGOs; • Judge Ashraf Abdel Wahab Kamal Eldeen, Advisor to the Minister of Transitional Justice; • Judge Yasser Mahmoud Safwat Othman, Legal Advisor to the Minister of Transitional Justice; • Judge Mahmoud Mahmoud Khalaf, Representative of the Public Prosecutor Office; • Counsellor Mahmoud Afifi, Permanent Mission of the Arab Republic of Egypt to the United Nations Office at Geneva, the World Trade Organization and Other International Organizations in Geneva; • Counsellor Mohamed el-Molla, Permanent Mission of the Arab Republic of Egypt to the United Nations Office at Geneva, the World Trade Organization and Other International Organizations in Geneva; • First Secretary Mohamed el-Shahed, Permanent Mission of the Arab Republic of Egypt to the United Nations Office at Geneva, the World Trade Organization and Other International Organizations in Geneva; • Second Secretary Amr Essam el-Din, Permanent Mission of the Arab Republic of Egypt to the United Nations Office at Geneva, the World Trade Organization and Other International Organizations in Geneva; • Second Secretary Haitham Fathi Mabrouk, Ministry of Foreign Affairs.     