Distr.: General 7 April 2014 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-sixth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Eritrea * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.14-13129 *1413129* 
Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–121 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–34 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 35–121 6 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 122–123 13  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 27 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its eighteenth session from 27 January to 7 February 2014. The review of Eritrea was held at the 12th meeting on 3 February 2014. The delegation of Eritrea was headed by Tesfamichael Gerahtu. At its 17th meeting held on 6 February 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on Eritrea. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Eritrea: Austria, Indonesia and Sierra Leone. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Eritrea: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/ERI/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/ERI/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/ERI/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, the Czech Republic, Germany, Liechtenstein, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America was transmitted to Eritrea through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the UPR. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation of Eritrea thanked the States that had sent advance questions and concerns as well as expressions of support and stated that Eritrea valued all constructive engagements on the full enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms. 6. The delegation stated that the contents of the UPR report focused mainly on the implementation of the accepted recommendations and related issues. It had been prepared through a process of broad participation and high responsibility. A steering committee composed of representatives from all relevant line ministries and chaired by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs had been established and civil society organizations were represented in the committee. The United Nations country team in Eritrea also provided input. 7. Higher level consultations had been carried out, including with law enforcement agencies, members of the judiciary, regional administration and civic organizations, on the draft laws, which were now ready for proclamation. Furthermore, new laws on access to water, food security, privatization of State-owned enterprises and access to justice, as well as the accountability of judicial services and the expansion and extended jurisdiction of community magistrate courts had been introduced.  8. The the Constitution was the source of all legislative measures and the basis of economic, social, cultural and political policies and actions. While local and regional elections had been held, national election remained pending until the threats to national security and sovereignty had been eliminated. The delegation acknowledged that more effort was needed to establish some institutions provided for in the Constitution. Despite challenges and problems, efforts to strengthen the legal system and the rule of law had gained significant momentum in the past four years. 9. National development efforts focused on the consolidation of all aspects of social justice to ensure that every citizen had the ability to lead a life of dignity with development in a society that reflected the common values and aspirations. Equal rights and opportunities had become the hallmarks of the Government’s strategic interventions to ensure equitable distribution of basic services and the expansion of even development in all regions and localities.  10. The delegation stated that microcredit schemes for rural farmers, women cooperative farms, disadvantaged women, disabled citizens and other needy sections of the community had expanded significantly. The major Government institutions, the Eritrean Development Bank and other stakeholders had thus increased the level of investment and the degree of support to these disadvantaged groups. 11. The privatization of Government-owned entities and enterprises and the establishment of a privatization agency under the Proclamation issued in 2013 was expected to widen the opportunities for all citizens to benefit from the wealth of the nation at various levels. 12. Programmes to assist all the disadvantaged social groups had been expanded by the Government in collaboration with stakeholders and Eritreans inside and outside of the country. 13. The delegation provided information on the steps taken towards cultural transformations as well as to explore the cultural heritage of all the ethnic groups in conformity with the ideals of national unity and national development.  14. The delegation stated that Eritrea had redoubled its efforts to improve the life style and conditions of living of its entire population. The strategy targeting poverty elimination and transforming living standards was an ongoing effort.  15. The demographic distribution of services by the Government had shown remarkable progress in terms of access, coverage and viability. In the previously disadvantaged areas, as well as rural sections and periphery parts of the country, there had been continuing growth on all social indicators in the past four years. 16. Eritrea was on course to achieving three Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) (Goal 4 on reducing child mortality, Goal 5 on improving maternal health and Goal 6 on combating HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases). It was also on track with four other goals. 17. With regard to human dignity, the Eritrean Correctional and Rehabilitation Services (ECRS) had a major undertaking of rehabilitating and reintegrating convicted prisoners into society upon release.  18. The delegation stated that torture was criminalized in the domestic legal system and thus close monitoring had been an established practice in the past four years. Moreover, evidence collected through these means remained inadmissible in courts of law. 19. The Government had also continued its strict policy of zero tolerance for all forms of sexual violence. Awareness campaigns had been stepped up by all concerned agencies and the police had conducted public forums and campaigns in high schools. 20. The delegation stated that any contract of marriage between persons below 18 years of age was null and void. Spouses and witnesses to such marriage faced punishment under the Penal Code.  21. The Government had outlawed the practice of female genital mutilation (FGM) and cutting and that an extensive campaign was ongoing. Reported cases submitted to the courts had been penalized. However, challenges still remained in addressing that problem, including reaching nomadic populations and bringing about behavioural changes through knowledge and awareness. 22. The rights of the child were at the centre of Government policies and strategies. Efforts had been made to strengthen the family unit, provide a better environment for the growth and development of children and empower communities to coordinate and promote good child care and appropriate socialization practices. The community-based orphan reintegration programme had also been successfully expanded..  23. The delegation stated that there were no cases of child labour in Eritrea. Children were not recruited for labour, but there was a culture, tradition and practice of children participating in family activities and work. Raising the monitoring capacity and awareness of all concerned were major challenges. 24. The Government had established a probation service to provide counselling and to integrate children who had been in conflict with the law into schools and neighbourhoods after their release.  25. The political and social roles of women in political activities, the elected assemblies, administration at local and regional levels and in other government positions had improved in the past four years. 26. The delegation provided information on the efforts made to bridge the gender gap in education and enhance the quality of girls’ education in the school system. With regard to combating adult illiteracy, data from the 2011/2012 academic year showed that 52,747 adults had participated in adult literacy programs, with women constituting 95 per cent of the participants. Similarly, the number of vocational training programmes for women had also been significant and during that academic year, 38 per cent of the 4,640 students enrolled were women. 27. The delegation stated that Eritrea continued to encourage the voluntary repatriation of persons who might have left the country illegally and in violation of the immigration laws, and that several rehabilitation and reintegration programmes for people returning on their own volition had been created. The Government was working to establish a mechanism to facilitate access to relevant international bodies, particularly the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in accordance with recommendation 107 from the first UPR cycle.  28. The delegation provided information on the reorganization and restructuring of its structures, starting from the local level, in accordance with the motto, “political dynamism, effective management and organization”. The Government was focusing on activating the involvement of communities in managing their own affairs, with emphasis on local empowerment through greater devolution of authority to local governance and regional administrations.  29. The delegation stated that the political landscape respected fundamental freedoms, namely freedom of expression, association and religion. No one had been detained for expressing his or her views or ideas, including for criticizing government policies and actions; there had never been any restriction on accessing the Internet and religious harmony, mutual respect, mutual understanding of the religions continued to flourish. 30. The delegation stated that Eritrea had submitted reports under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the eight fundamental conventions of the International Labour Organization (ILO). The Government had responded to many questionnaires and letters from those monitoring bodies and had also responded positively to communications transmitted under the complaint procedure of the Human Rights Council, as well as directly to the Council during its twentieth and twenty-first sessions. Eritrea had attended all the regular sessions of the Council since the nineteenth session with the objective of working closely with the Council.  31. The delegation stated that Eritrea had been wrongly targeted with politically motivated resolutions of the Council that denigrated the ongoing efforts of the Government in promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms. Eritrea considered that country-specific resolutions did not serve the advancement of human rights and constituted a double standard and a deviation from the UPR process, which was a forum for constructive engagement. 32. The imposition of unjustified sanctions had negatively impacted the full enjoyment of human rights. Eritrea had been subjected to a litany of accusations of gross violations of human rights, while the facts on the ground illustrated that those accusations were invalid and were mainly motivated by sinister political agendas.  33. The sanctions imposed on Eritrea by the United Nations and the continued occupation of sovereign Eritrean territories entailed the prolongation of national service and other onerous burdens on the country and its people, which also deserved consideration. Unnecessary expenditure for defence as well as undesirable delays in some aspects of the political process were byproducts of that reality and it was in that respect that the continued occupation of its sovereign territories violated the right of the Eritrean people to live in peace. In that regard, the delegation called on the Council to give due regard in its agenda to the right of the Eritrean people to live in peace.  34. The delegation provided information on some of Eritrea’s best practices in the advancement of human rights, which included the community-based approach to addressing social problems, the approach to orphans and other vulnerable children with disabilities, provision of free education up to the tertiary level, charging of a nominal fee for health services up to referral treatment and the institution of the Injury Surveillance System. The country also observed United Nations recognized international days as occasions to promote public awareness on critical issues.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 35. During the interactive dialogue, 70 delegations made statements. The recommendations made during the dialogue can be found in section II of the present report. 36. Armenia noted the efforts to improve socioeconomic conditions, especially the national policy on food security. Noting the provision of free compulsory basic education and efforts to improve school enrolment, it expressed concern that the final year of schooling was undertaken in military training camps. 37. Australia was disappointed that no special procedures mandate holder had been permitted to visit Eritrea, and that the country’s Constitution had still not been implemented. It was concerned about reports of torture, harsh prison conditions, incommunicado detention and compulsory military service. 38. Austria commended Eritrea for inviting OHCHR to visit the country. It expressed concern about the lack of due judicial process, questionable detentions and poor detention conditions, and remarked that indefinite military conscription constituted forced labour and deepened poverty, while the lack of free press curtailed freedom of expression. 39. Belgium noted progress in combating FGM, but expressed concern about the deterioration of the human rights situation in several areas. It noted the use of children in armed conflicts. 40. Bhutan noted, inter alia, the provision of free education, vocational skills training for school dropouts and economic empowerment programmes for women, among other achievements. It commended Eritrea’s progress towards attaining the MDGs on health, gender equality, poverty, hunger and primary education. 41. Botswana, acknowledging the progress made in health, education and gender equality and noted the reports of disappearances, torture, detentions without trial, judicial interference and restrictions on the freedoms of movement, expression and public participation. It encouraged Eritrea to strengthen the rule of law and civil and political rights. 42. Brazil encouraged further efforts to enhance women’s rights. It expressed concern that Eritrea had not ratified the core human rights treaties and that freedom of expression and religion remained limited. Brazil asked how the international community could support the implementation of recommendations. 43. Canada asked Eritrea about steps taken to repeal criminalization of consensual homosexual activity. It expressed concern about poor prison conditions, torture and secret detention centres and urged Eritrea to fulfil its obligations and allow monitors and special procedures mandate holders to visit Eritrea. 44. Chad noted that significant consultations with all relevant stakeholders had been held in view of the preparation of the national report. It acknowledged that Eritrea was party to some of the principal international human rights instruments. 45. Chile welcomed the adoption of Proclamation 158/2007 prohibiting FGM and the related awareness-raising campaigns. It was concern at forced disappearances. It noted the progress towards attaining the health-related MDGs. 46. China acknowledged the promotion of economic, social and cultural rights — which improved food security —, integrated rural development, infrastructure strengthening, health and education and gender equality. It called on the international community to provide assistance to meet the challenges. 47. Colombia acknowledged efforts to implement recommendations from the first UPR cycle and particularly highlighted the progress made in respecting women’s rights and access to health care and education. It proposed to share its experience in designing and implementing mechanisms to monitor implementation of the recommendations. 48. Croatia noted efforts to educate girls and attain the MDGs related to gender equality. It welcomed efforts to eradicate FGM, but was concerned that the incidence of FGM remained high. It expressed concern about non-recognition of conscientious objection to military service and the impact of indefinite military service on children and society. 49. Cuba noted efforts to improve social, economic and cultural rights, particularly the rights to food, health and education, and emphasized the positive reforms in basic education, prohibition of child labour and re-education of minors in conflict with the law. It acknowledged the integration of women in Government. 50. Estonia urged Eritrea to implement all recommendations made and to cooperate with the special procedures mandate holders, increase efforts and funding to improve women’s rights, eliminate FGM and forced marriage and ensure freedom of expression, association and assembly. 51. Denmark expressed concern that very little progress had been made in implementing recommendations accepted during the first UPR cycle, particularly those concerning combating torture and other ill-treatment. It noted that Eritrea had not ratified the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT). 52. Djibouti noted the lack of efforts to implement recommendations from the first UPR cycle. It expressed concern about the fate of prisoners secretly detained during the 2008 border conflict with Djibouti, and the lack of cooperation with the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Eritrea. 53. Ecuador acknowledged the legislative progress made, in particular towards replacing the transitional codes and the adoption of Proclamation 158/2007 to abolish FGM. It noted the work to relocate orphans, particularly children orphaned as a result of HIV/AIDS. 54. Egypt noted that the judiciary was in the final stage of drafting new codes to replace the transitional codes, and that Eritrea’s international obligations had been taken into account in the new codes. 55. The Czech Republic remained concerned about the lack of progress on key human rights issues, including the numerous pending requests of the special procedures to visit the country. 56. France noted the contact made between the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Eritrean authorities to discuss assistance to tackle human rights issues. It noted the efforts made to address social rights, particularly regarding health, but remained concern by the human rights situation. 57. Gabon noted progress and good practice in implementing recommendations made during the first UPR cycle, however, it agreed that many challenges remained. It encouraged Eritrea to ratify international human rights instruments and improve collaboration with OHCHR, special procedures and other mechanisms. 58. Switzerland remained concerned about extrajudicial executions, forced disappearances, indefinite national service, arbitrary detention and restricted freedoms. It expressed the wish for civil society to play a greater role. Noting the promotion of education, it invited Eritrea to improve civil and political rights.  59. Ghana urged Eritrea to complete the ratification and implementation of CAT, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), ILO Convention No. 182 on Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour and the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW). 60. Indonesia noted Eritrea’s efforts to promote and protect human rights, in particular economic, social and cultural rights, such as the 2010 Water Proclamation and the 2012 proclamations to enhance access to justice and the right to basic education. 61. The Islamic Republic of Iran acknowledged the challenges faced by the Government with regard to achievement in most socioeconomic areas, such as education, health care, economic growth and social justice. 62. Ireland was concerned at Eritrea’s failure to respond to the requests of special procedures mandate holders. It reiterated the call of the Human Rights Council in its resolution 23/21 for Eritrea to fully implement its 1997 Constitution. It noted continued practice of FGM. 63. Italy was concerned about reports of torture and indefinite conscription amounting to forced labour. It recognized efforts to boost trade and investment to alleviate poverty and improve living standards. It noted that some population groups were more vulnerable to discrimination. 64. Japan hoped that Eritrea would cooperate with the international community, including United Nations mechanisms. It expected Eritrea to end impunity, the use of torture, arbitrary and extrajudicial detentions and enforced disappearances. It hoped for further progress on the issues of FGM and sexual violence. 65. Kenya noted the ongoing commitment to providing subsidized health care and free education. It highlighted that some of the recommendations accepted by Eritrea during the previous UPR cycle had not been implemented, particularly those concerning torture and child labour. 66. Latvia recalled that during the first UPR cycle, it had recommended that Eritrea step up cooperation with the special procedures and noted that visit requests by special procedures had not yet been accepted. 67. Lithuania strongly encouraged Eritrea to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Eritrea and other special procedures mandate holders. It was concerned at Eritrea’s failure to implement previous recommendations and expressed concern about restrictions to freedom of assembly and expression and that rape and sexual violence during military service were widespread. 68. Luxembourg remained concerned at discrimination and violence against women and girls, particularly early marriage, FGM and sexual and domestic violence. It was deeply concerned that many young unaccompanied Eritreans were taking refuge in neighbouring countries following their parents’ detention, exile or military service. 69. Malaysia noted ongoing efforts to improve the rights of women and children, particularly in the area of education. It noted that more efforts were needed to meet the MDG to eradicate extreme hunger and poverty. 70. Mauritania noted the enactment of legislation to improve the situation of women and vulnerable groups. It urged the Government to step up its efforts to promote national reconciliation, social harmony and political stability. 71. Mexico was concerned about the high number of political prisoners, persons detained for desertion and the treatment and conditions of persons in Sawa military camp. It stressed the importance of allowing access to the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), family visits and legal and medical assistance. 72. Montenegro asked what steps had been taken to end the compulsory practice of all children completing their final year of schooling in a military camp; about the delay in implementing the recommendations to ratify treaties such as CAT and the Optional Protocol thereto (OP-CAT), the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Politial Rights, the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CPED) and CPRD; and what steps had been taken to implement the Constitution without delay and to hold free and transparent elections. 73. Namibia noted the efforts made to finalize the new criminal code and other codes and Eritrea’s proclamations on water and on enhancing access to and better delivery of justice.  74. The Netherlands remained concerned about severe restrictions on freedom of expression, association and religion, prolonged military service, arbitrary detention, torture, prisoner maltreatment, extrajudicial killings and secret prisons. It urged Eritrea to allow ICRC unrestricted access to prison facilities. 75. Nigeria urged Eritrea to expedite implementation of the recommendations from the previous UPR cycle, incorporate international human rights conventions into domestic legislation, ensure press freedom, improve health institutions and access to health services and prioritize education. It invited Eritrea to ratify CPED.  76. Norway expressed concern at the excessive militarization of Eritrean society and its reported effect on people’s daily lives and the lack of freedom of expression. It noted that the rule of law and fundamental freedoms were still not respected in Eritrea. 77. Paraguay noted challenges but recognized efforts to improve access to water and sanitation, food, health care and education. It expressed concern about reports of serious violations of human rights, particularly arbitrary detentions, extrajudicial killings, enforced disappearances and inhumane conditions of detention. 78. The Philippines noted efforts to implement the recommendations from the first UPR, attain the MDGs, improve the situation of women and children and address gender inequality and FGM. 79. Portugal welcomed efforts to assist street children. It was concerned that all children were required to complete their final year of schooling in a military training camp, involving the conscription of children into the military. 80. The Republic of Korea noted efforts to implement the recommendations from the first UPR, progress towards attaining the health-related MDGs and advancing women in parliamentary and government positions. It remained seriously concerned about the human rights situation. 81. Romania hoped that the Eritrean authorities would take the necessary steps to ensure the exercise of human rights by all Eritrean citizens. It was concerned about reports of the many challenges remaining since the last UPR. 82. The Russian Federation noted progress made in promoting and protecting human rights since the first UPR, but acknowledged remaining problems. 83. Saudi Arabia noted efforts thus far, despite a lack of resources, and highlighted the 2010 Water Proclamation and the 2012 Proclamation to enhance access to justice. It encouraged further efforts to promote and protect human rights at all levels. 84. Singapore noted the results obtained in combating HIV/AIDS and malaria and reducing the child mortality rate. It acknowledged the promotion of gender equality, increased government funding for women to set up their own businesses and available vocational training.  85. In response to the advance questions as well as questions and comments from the floor, the delegation of Eritrea emphasized that no person had been detained for peacefully expressing his or her views and that media censorship was not practiced. Also, no journalist had been detained for performing his or her duty under the professional ethics of journalism. 86. Freedom of association was guaranteed under the Constitution and other laws, and various associations were working without any restrictions and with full freedom. Labour unions existed and the autonomy of trade unions was guaranteed under Labour Proclamation No. 118/2001. Eritrea had signed and ratified seven ILO conventions and it was duly submitting its reports in that regard.  87. The Government issued the 1995 Proclamation on religions and the 2002 registration decree, requiring all religious organizations to register and declare their property. Some groups which refused to adhere to the law alleged that they have been persecuted.  88. Following the criminalization of FGM, an intensive anti-FGM campaign had been conducted and yielded good results. Underage marriage was also criminalized. The Government followed a strict policy of zero tolerance to sexual violence.  89. The delegation stated that consensual same-sex sexual conduct was against the values and culture of Eritrean society. 90. The delegation stated that there was no arbitrary detention in Eritrea. National Service was not limited to military service and encompassed reconstruction and rehabilitation of the war-damaged country. The law strictly prohibited child soldiers and only persons 18 years of age and older did national service. 91. Trafficking in persons was a criminal act and Eritrea was cooperating with all concerned countries and agencies in that regard.  92. All the provisions enshrined in the Constitution, with the exception of those dealing with national election — for the obvious reason of the “no-war-no-peace situation”—, were strictly implemented and adhered to.  93. The so-called “G15”, who were high government officials, had been detained for treason and subversive acts committed at the time of war, when the very existence of the country was under threat. By those acts, they had abdicated their membership. The Eritrean National Assembly, at its 14th session, had discussed their cases and mandated the Government to handle the matter appropriately.  94. The delegation stated that the death penalty could serve as deterrent factor and had been used in very exceptional and limited cases.  95. The dossiers for ratification of CAT, CRPD, ICRMW and ILO Convention No. 182 on the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour have been internally processed and were ready for approval and endorsement. Normally the process took some time to be reviewed by all the government institutions concerned and examined by the Ministry of Justice for harmonization with the other national laws. 96. The delegation stated that Eritrea endeavoured to submit its regular reports under the conventions and treaties that it had signed, and would consider requests for visits by Special Rapporteurs on a case-by-case basis, however, country-specific special procedures mandate holder did not promote human rights, but rather negated neutrality and objectivity. The appointment of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights situation in  Eritrea was politically motivated and intended to undermine the UPR mechanisms.  97. Slovakia noted that further efforts were needed to address challenges to the freedoms of movement and expression. It called on Eritrea to cooperate fully with special procedures mandate holders and OHCHR to improve the human rights situation in the country. 98. Slovenia commended efforts to achieve the MDGs and noted the decrease in cases of FGM. It expressed concern at reports of rape and sexual harassment in military and educational training camps or during interrogation, domestic violence and harsh conditions in detention facilities. 99. Somalia called upon the country to promote its rich ethnic, cultural, linguistic and religious diversity and to work towards a lasting peace among all the people in the Horn of Africa.  100. South Sudan acknowledged progress in the field of education at all levels, particularly in school enrolment of girls. It noted that, despite progress made in combating FGM, it remained prevalent, and encouraged the Government to make further efforts. 101. Spain was concerned at the human rights situation in Eritrea and at the lack of implementation of many of the recommendations from the previous UPR. It noted progress with regard to the right to safe drinking water and sanitation and in the area of child protection, but considered that there remained many shortcomings. 102. Sudan noted efforts to improve the rights of women, persons with disabilities and children, particularly the provision of assistance to orphan children and juveniles. It called upon the relevant bodies to provide the technical cooperation requested to improve human rights. 103. Sweden acknowledged progress on certain health-related MDGs, but noted that recommendations to improve political and civil rights had not been addressed. It was concerned about violations of freedom of speech and the press and that the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Eritrea had not been granted access to the country. 104. Germany deplored the lack of progress in the human rights situation since the first UPR cycle and noted that none of the accepted recommendations it had made had been implemented. It expressed deep concern at the continued forced labour of conscripts.  105. Thailand noted that challenges remained to the promotion of women’s rights, including protection from domestic violence and FGM. It noted the commitment to establish a standing committee to receive complaints of human rights violations and encouraged Eritrea to consider areas of cooperation with OHCHR.  106. Togo noted some progress in implementing the recommendations from the previous UPR, the adoption of programmes to provide assistance to orphans and street children, the provision of free compulsory education and the focus on education for girls. 107. Tunisia reaffirmed its support for the Eritrean people, the creation of a democratic State and respect of human rights. It noted the adoption of legislation to strengthen the judicial system, protect children’s rights and ensure gender equality. 108. Turkey considered that Eritrea’s invitation to the OHCHR should pave the way for further cooperation through technical support. It noted the emphasis on education for women and girls and the policy to eradicate FGM, as part of its efforts to achieve gender equality. 109. Uganda noted the programme for the economic empowerment of women, the Integrated Rural Development Schemes, the Nomadic Education Policy Framework, the establishment of vocational training schools, the provision of adult and lifelong education and the prohibition of FGM.  110. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland urged Eritrea to cooperate with the United Nations and the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Eritrea. Regretting the lack of progress in the area of human rights, it hoped that concrete improvements would be forthcoming. Eritrea should fully implement its Constitution. 111. The United States of America urged Eritrea to promote human rights and fundamental freedoms and to invite the Special Rapporteur. It expressed concern that the Government did not prioritize civil and political rights and had not accounted for the disappearance of political prisoners. It noted the lack of democracy.  112. Uruguay encouraged Eritrea to redouble its efforts to implement all the recommendations, strengthen cooperation with the United Nations and strengthen efforts to incorporate international obligations into its new legislation. It recognized progress in the fight against FGM. 113. Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) noted the development of social investment programmes for more equal wealth distribution, which had improved health, food security and access to water and sanitation. It noted progress in basic and compulsory education. 114. Yemen noted suitable changes to the jurisdiction of the courts, the revision of procedures and legislation to ensure social justice, access to food security, health services, education and infrastructure, and other amendments to domestic legislation. 115. Afghanistan noted progress in the protection of children’s rights through the provision of free basic education and the prohibition of the engagement of minors in any occupation that endangered their physical and mental development, as well as measures for health protection. 116. Algeria considered that the ratification of certain international instruments would positively contribute to the human rights situation. It noted that efforts were needed to combat poverty and prevent violence, including FGM, and discrimination against women. Technical assistance would be required for Eritrea to fulfil its human rights obligations.  117. Argentina shared the concerns relating to the political, security, humanitarian and human rights situation in Eritrea, which were expressed in the latest resolution of the Human Rights Council on the human rights situation in Eritrea. 118. The delegation of Eritrea stated that the recommendation relating to the 2-per cent tax and the destabilization of the Horn of Africa was out of context. Eritrea is an active member that tries to promote peace and stability. It considered that the issue lacked a human-rights dimension and was abusive. In that connection, the delegation called upon the President of the Human Rights Council to strike the recommendation from the record.  119. Eritrea was committed to working with the Council on the advancement of human rights under the UPR mechanism. The delegation stated that the country-specific resolution on Eritrea was unjustified as it was initiated for political reasons to attain political objectives. In its view, that kind of approach undermined the UPR process. 120. Eritreans had fought long and hard and paid enormous sacrifices for their self-determination. It was therefore fit and proper that the country’s priority should be ensuring peace and security, accelerating the development agenda and preserving the life and dignity of its people. The delegation called upon the Council to exercise its moral authority in lifting the sanctions and ending the occupation. Those were challenges that could not be taken lightly as they continued to impede the country’s efforts in the fulfilment of its human rights obligations.  121. The President of the Human Rights Council brought to the attention of the delegations the rules and procedures for the preparation of the reports of the Working Group, according to which those reports must be factual and must reflect the interventions made by the State under review and the delegations taking the floor. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations** 122. The following recommendations will be examined by Eritrea, which will respond in due course, but no later than the twenty-sixth session of the Human Rights Council in June 2014. The responses will be included in the outcome report adopted by the Council at its twenty-sixth session: ** The conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 122.1. Ratify the international human rights instruments which it is not yet a party to (Chad); 122.2. Consider the possibility of acceding to all the international human rights treaties and conventions to which it is not yet party (Russian Federation); 122.3. Sign and ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the Optional Protocols to ICCPR (Lithuania); 122.4. Consider accession to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Armenia); 122.5. Ratify the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and fully implement its provisions (Australia);  122.6. Complete as soon as possible the process of accession to Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Uruguay); 122.7. Ratify Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Latvia); 122.8. Ratify, without further delay, the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Slovakia); 122.9. Ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Paraguay); 122.10. Ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and its Optional Protocol (Estonia); 122.11. Ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment without delay (Denmark); 122.12. Swiftly ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment as well as the Optional Protocol thereto (Czech Republic); 122.13. Ratify CAT without undue delay (Austria); 122.14. Take all necessary steps to fully implement the principles of CAT without further delay and accelerate the procedures to ratify it (Italy); 122.15. Take the necessary steps to become a party to all major human rights instruments, including the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol (Brazil); 122.16. Ratify the Rome Statute of the ICC and take steps to fully align the national legislation with all obligations under the Rome Statute, including by adopting provisions aimed at thorough and expeditious cooperation with the ICC (Croatia); 122.17. Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Estonia); 122.18. Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and fully align its legislation with all obligations under the Rome Statute, including incorporating the definition of crimes and general principles of the Statute, as well as adopting provisions enabling cooperation with the Court (Latvia);  122.19. Ratification of the Rome Statute establishing the International Criminal Court (Romania); 122.20. Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and implement it fully at the national level and accede to the Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of the Court (Slovakia); 122.21. Withdraw existing reservations to ICCPR and ratify both ICCPR Optional Protocols (Estonia); 122.22. Comply, in law and in practice, with its obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Czech Republic); 122.23. Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Ecuador); 122.24. Ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Convention on Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Punishment or Treatment (Gabon); 122.25. Smooth acceptance of visit requests by special procedures mandate holders and swift accession to core international human rights instruments such as the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Japan); 122.26. Ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Netherlands); 122.27. Sign and ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and its Optional Protocol, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the First and Second Optional Protocols to ICCPR, the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and ultimately the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Portugal); 122.28. Ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Spain); 122.29. Ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and its Optional Protocol, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the International Convention on the Protection of all Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the Rome Statute (Tunisia); 122.30. Implement fully the 1997 Constitution and the rights that it enshrines, including allowing independent political parties and non-government organizations to function freely (Australia);  122.31. Apply all the provisions of the Constitution relevant to human rights and the rule of law (Tunisia); 122.32. Step up efforts for a rapid and definitive application of the country’s Constitution, ensuring that it incorporates the principles and commitments arising from international human rights instruments to which Eritrea is signatory or has acceded (Uruguay); 122.33. Fully implement the Constitution to ensure the administration of justice and the rule of law and also establish an independent human rights institution to oversee human rights issues (Republic of Korea); 122.34. Expeditiously and fully implement the Constitution adopted in 1997 and strive for the earliest adoption of a penal code, a criminal procedure code as well as a civil code and a civil procedure code, in accordance with international standards, and provide clearly in new legislation for freedom of expression, assembly, movement, religion and belief (Slovakia); 122.35. Expeditiously and fully implement the 1997 Constitution and the rights that it enshrines in order to end the 23 years of the one-party-State-led transitional period and seek technical assistance from regional bodies and the international community (Somalia); 122.36. Take measures to fully implement the Constitution of 1997 and ensure the rule of law (Sweden); 122.37. The Government of Eritrea, which is currently operating on pre-Constitutional transitional powers, should heed the call of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Eritrea to fully implement the Constitution without delay, and subsequently hold elections, thereby ensuring further governance in accordance with international principles to the rule of law (Namibia); 122.38. Immediately lift the state of emergency, implement the 1997 Constitution and hold free and fair elections with international monitoring (Germany); 122.39. Reform the electoral system and organize periodic and genuine multi.party elections, in accordance with international democratic standards (Czech Republic); 122.40. Take the necessary measures to fully implement the 1997 Constitution and thus allow, among others, the existence and independence of political parties and other organs of civil society (Switzerland); 122.41. Take urgent steps to promulgate and implement its national Constitution guaranteeing universally accepted recognized fundamental human rights for all citizens and the rest of its population (Ghana); 122.42. Continue efforts in strengthening democratic institutions, including through capacity-building in the State legislative, executive as well as judiciary system (Indonesia); 122.43. Enhance and implement domestic laws to further promote and protect the civil and political rights of the Eritrean people (Philippines); 122.44. Reform legislation in the area of the right to freedom of conscience and religion (Russian Federation); 122.45. Establish an independent human rights institution (Ghana); 122.46. Strengthen its institutional framework, including by establishing a national human rights institution according to the Paris Principles (Indonesia); 122.47. Establish an independent mechanism for human rights in accordance with the Paris Principles (South Sudan); 122.48. Establish a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Algeria); 122.49. Establish an independent national human rights institution in accordance with Paris Principles (Tunisia); 122.50. Put in place mechanisms to follow up on the recommendations of the UPR, which promote equality of rights and non-discrimination of all citizens, in particular vulnerable groups (Colombia); 122.51. Implement the recommendations of the previous UPR, in particular ratification of the Convention on Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Punishment or Treatment, the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the Rome Statute (France); 122.52. Expedite the implementation of the accepted recommendations from the first UPR cycle, including the ratification of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and ILO Convention No. 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour (Kenya); 122.53. Fully implement Security Council resolution 2023 of 2011, which condemns Eritrea’s use of the “diaspora tax” to destabilize the Horn of Africa region and violate the sanctions regime (Somalia); 122.54. Make operational a standing committee to receive complaints and petitions as well as redress cases of human rights violations, including by appointing independent members of the standing committee created to address human rights violation and providing adequate resources, to hold those violators accountable (Thailand); 122.55. End indefinite national service and begin a phased demobilization for those serving for more than the statutory 18 months, and allow substitute service for conscientious objectors (Norway); 122.56. Abolish military conscription and compulsory military training, particularly for children (Australia); 122.57. End conscription of persons for indefinite periods into national service and cease forced participation of persons in the citizen militia and other national projects (United States of America); 122.58. Prohibit the participation of minors in military service and accept the practice of conscientious objection (Spain); 122.59. Modify the regulation on conscription and organize it in a way consistent with the respect for human rights (Italy); 122.60. Establish provisions for conscientious objections to military service and bring an end to indefinite, involuntary conscription or national service — a severe form of forced labour —, in particular of children (Germany); 122.61. End the practice of indefinite national service and allow substitute service for conscientious objectors (Croatia); 122.62. Recognize the right to conscientious objection to military service in law and practice (Croatia); 122.63. Implement Proclamation No. 82/1995, limiting national service obligations and cease the practice of obliging citizens to serve in an armed civilian militia (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 122.64. Take appropriate steps with a view to releasing all imprisoned conscientious objectors without delay (Croatia); 122.65. End the practice of indefinite national service and initiate demobilization for those who have completed the statutory 18 months of service (Austria); 122.66. Immediately end the practice of indefinitely extending military service, a system which amounts to forced labour (Canada); 122.67. Take the necessary measures to ensure respect for human rights, including the rights of women, political rights, the rights of persons in detention and the right of freedom of expression as it pertains to the press and other media (Canada); 122.68. Continue efforts aimed at the progressive realization of economic, social and cultural rights (Colombia); 122.69. Pursue all efforts to preserve the progress achieved in a number of areas such as culture, education, health and the fight against social inequality (Egypt); 122.70. Strengthen the social welfare system to protect children in the most affected communities from harmful practices, violence and exploitation (South Sudan); 122.71. Strengthen its efforts aimed at enhancing human rights awareness to all sectors of the society (Sudan); 122.72. Adopt and implement the previous recommendations of the Human Rights Council and its Special Rapporteurs, and grant access to special procedures mandate holders (Netherlands); 122.73. Fully cooperate with regional and international human rights bodies (Somalia); 122.74. Submit all the reports due under the treaty bodies (Togo); 122.75. Cooperate with the High Commissioner for Human Rights, treaty bodies and special procedures mandate holders (Chad); 122.76. Identify, together with OHCHR, the possible areas for cooperation in the field of human rights (Paraguay); 122.77. Cooperate with OHCHR; allow access to an OHCHR mission to Eritrea, as requested by the High Commissioner for Human Rights, and accept the visit requests made by five special procedures mandate holders (Portugal); 122.78. Effectively cooperate with OHCHR and the mandate holders of the Human Rights Council, including the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Eritrea, and issue a standing invitation to the special procedures mandate holders (Tunisia); 122.79. Enhance its cooperation with the mechanisms of the Human Rights Council and OHCHR (Kenya); 122.80. Extend a standing invitation to the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Eritrea and to all other special procedures mandate holders, and cooperate fully with OHCHR (Germany); 122.81. Fully cooperate with United Nations mechanisms on the promotion and protection of human rights, as well as with the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (Gabon); 122.82. Step up cooperation with the Human Rights Council, OHCHR, special procedures and treaty bodies to address the remaining human rights challenges identified in Eritrea’s report (Ghana); 122.83. Improve its cooperation with the special procedures of the Human Rights Council by responding positively to the pending visit requests and eventually consider extending a standing invitation to all special procedures mandate holders of the Human Rights Council (Latvia); 122.84. Grant the requests made by the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in 2005 and 2007 and by the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Eritrea to visit the country (Somalia); 122.85. Accept the visit requests by the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions (Uruguay); 122.86. Enhance cooperation with all human rights mechanisms particularly by issuing a standing invitation to the special procedures mandate holders (Republic of Korea); 122.87. Cooperate with special procedures mandate holders by responding positively to requests for information and visits (Ireland); 122.88. Issue a standing invitation to the United Nations human rights special procedures (Portugal); 122.89. Duly cooperate with the special procedures of the Human Rights Council and issue a standing invitation to all special procedures (Czech Republic); 122.90. Cooperate with the United Nations special procedures, especially by responding positively to mandate holders’ requests for visits (Brazil); 122.91. Cooperate with the international community, including by providing access to the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Eritrea, in a transparent manner for the benefit of the human rights of the Eritrean people (Norway); 122.92. Co-operation with the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Eritrea (Romania); 122.93. Cooperate with the human rights mechanisms in particular the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Eritrea (South Sudan); 122.94. Allow the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Eritrea to enter the country, fully cooperate with her and implement the relevant recommendations formulated by her (Togo); 122.95. Allow the Human Rights Council Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Eritrea to visit the country without further delay and fully cooperate with her (Italy); 122.96. Cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Eritrea (Montenegro); 122.97. Take concrete measures to allow the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Eritrea to fully implement her mandate, including granting her unfettered access to the country (Sweden); 122.98. Further develop cooperation with the relevant United Nations bodies and be ready to support the country’s efforts in all aspects (Turkey); 122.99. Allow the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Eritrea to visit the country, cooperate fully with her and give due consideration to the recommendations contained in her first report (Portugal); 122.100. Fully cooperate with the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Eritrea and respond without further delay to the longstanding request to visit the country (Namibia); 122.101. Fully cooperate with the special procedures mandate holders, in particular the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Eritrea (France); 122.102. Invite the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Eritrea to visit the country (Australia); 122.103. Offer cooperation and access to the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Eritrea (Botswana); 122.104. Accede to the request of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, introduced in 2003 and renewed in 2005, to visit the country (Belgium); 122.105. Address concerns regarding the promotion and protection of human rights expressed by the Human Rights Council in its resolutions (Namibia); 122.106. Submit without any delay the initial report under the Optional Protocol to CRC on the involvement of children in armed conflict (Belgium);  122.107. Harmonize national laws to incorporate the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, in particular articles 9, 12, 19, 21 (Mexico); 122.108. Continue to make its best efforts to abolish all types of discriminatory practices against women and children, which notably includes female genital mutilation (FGM), early marriage and domestic violence (Republic of Korea); 122.109. Continue its efforts to promote gender equality and the empowerment of women (Singapore);  122.110. Continue the efforts of women’s empowerment and ensure their enjoyment of their legitimate rights (Sudan); 122.111. Continue its efforts towards protecting human rights, especially through promoting gender equality, and support economic empowerment of women in the country (Armenia); 122.112. Strengthen policies for the promotion of women (Luxembourg); 122.113. Provide adequate resources to implement awareness-raising activities on the role of women and strengthen the existing structures for the advancement of women in the country (Malaysia); 122.114. Continue to take more measures to promote gender equality and protect women and children’s rights in practice (China); 122.115. Launch a national dialogue, as well as a campaign through media and in the schools, to tackle all forms of discrimination against lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) persons (Italy); 122.116. Implement all constitutional provisions and international obligations relating to the right to life, liberty and security of person, including by unconditionally releasing all prisoners held for their political or religious beliefs (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 122.117. Abolish the death penalty (France); 122.118. Completely abolish the death penalty and sign and accede to the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Spain); 122.119. Establish an immediate official moratorium on the use of the death penalty with a view to abolishing it (Montenegro); 122.120. Put an end to the widespread use of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment as well as to arbitrary and extrajudicial executions (Djibouti); 122.121. Put an end to all human rights violations and release all political prisoners, civil society activists and journalists, end all practices of torture and eliminate all forms of extrajudicial executions (Tunisia); 122.122. Investigate all pending reports of enforced or involuntary disappearances and punish the perpetrators of these crimes (Chile); 122.123. Ensure that the recruitment of children into armed forces stops and that the children are not subjected to forced labour (Switzerland); 122.124. Intensify efforts to combat child labour and trafficking in persons, especially women and children (Philippines); 122.125. Intensify executive and legislative efforts to eliminate the practice of female genital mutilation (Chile); 122.126. Intensify efforts and allocate resources for measures aimed at eradicating female genital mutilation, as a matter of priority (Croatia); 122.127. Continue efforts started in 2007 to promote women’s rights, in particular the prohibition of all forms of female genital mutilation (France); 122.128. Continue its efforts to achieve the complete eradication of female genital mutilation, including by raising awareness about the risks associated with this practice and about its prohibition (Ireland); 122.129. Emphasize and step up the fight against female genital mutilation, working together with local communities and educating girls and women about the negative consequences of this practice (Uruguay); 122.130. Strengthen its efforts, in particular by prosecuting such practice and by promoting gender equality in general, in order to effectively eliminate female genital mutilation and cutting (Slovenia); 122.131. Continue strengthening measures aimed at achieving the eradication of female genital mutilation (Argentina); 122.132. Intensify its efforts to protect women from domestic and sexual violence and to ensure that acts of such violence are fully investigated and those responsible held accountable (Lithuania); 122.133. Work with civil society organizations to assist and redress women affected by domestic violence (Thailand); 122.134. Improve the penitentiary system and the situation of detainees (Russian Federation); 122.135. Bring to an end inhumane detention conditions and ensure that all detainees are treated in accordance with international human rights standards (Germany); 122.136. Guarantee the physical integrity of all prisoners, improve conditions of detention in accordance with international standards and allow unhindered access by international monitors to all detention facilities (Slovenia); 122.137. Immediately respect international standards of law in the treatment of prisoners, including by providing prisoners with adequate food, water and medical assistance and ending overcrowding; allow independent monitors access to all known and secret Eritrean detention facilities; notify family members of the whereabouts of detainees; and restore visiting rights and access to legal representation (Norway); 122.138. Keep up the current efforts in order to improve conditions of detention, including limiting the overcrowding in prisons (Egypt); 122.139. Be accountable for all political prisoners, in particular the members of the “G15”, and release them (Djibouti); 122.140. Adopt measures that ensure that detainees are treated in accordance with international human rights standards, prosecute cases of torture and end arbitrary detentions of persons, including of the so-called “G15” (Spain); 122.141. Allow the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to visit places of detention and to visit prisoners of war from Djibouti (Djibouti); 122.142. Provide unlimited access to the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies to all detention facilities and provide independent monitors to access all Eritrean detention facilities, in particular the Djiboutian detainees, and ensure that international standards of law in the treatment of prisoners are respected in Eritrea (Somalia); 122.143. Put an end to the practice of indefinite national service and take measures, in consultation with its partners, to put an end to migration and human trafficking affecting thousands of Eritreans, including children (France); 122.144. Release or bring before a court all persons detained without a charge and respect international standards in the treatment of detainees (Austria); 122.145. Take all necessary measures to put an end to arbitrary arrests and prolonged detention without charge and without trial, especially for political reasons (France); 122.146. Immediately end arbitrary detention and guarantee effective legal representation, in accordance with international fair trial standards (Germany); 122.147. Respect the rules of fair procedure in accordance with its obligations under the international law and release immediately all persons detained without any valid reason (Switzerland); 122.148. That those imprisoned, suspected of holding dissenting opinions, including human rights defenders, civil society activists and journalists, should be unconditionally released (Norway); 122.149. Immediately and unconditionally release all prisoners of conscience (Spain); 122.150. Immediately cooperate to facilitate the release of political prisoners, improve prison conditions, and account for those prisoners who have disappeared (United States of America); 122.151. Continue efforts aimed at improving the administration of the justice system and the situation of persons deprived of their liberty (Ecuador); 122.152. Ensure that any physical or moral harm against journalists or human rights defenders is investigated and that the perpetrators are duly prosecuted (Belgium); 122.153. Ensure the respect of the fundamental rights and freedoms of all the population, in particular women and children, and adopt all necessary measures to guarantee the fight against the impunity of the perpetrators of crimes, acts of violence and all human rights violations (Argentina); 122.154. Guarantee the right to freedom of expression, opinion, conscience and religion or belief as well as the right to peaceful assembly and the right to freedom of association (France); 122.155. Guarantee the exercise of freedom of expression, association and peaceful assembly, including for the political opposition, journalists and civil society (Spain); 122.156. Take steps to improve the status of religious minorities and ensure protection for religious communities from persecution (Canada); 122.157. Guarantee the right to freedom of religion for the Eritrean citizens (Romania); 122.158. Ensure that the rights of all its people to freedom of expression, religion, and peaceful assembly are respected (Japan); 122.159. Respect and promote the right to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and association in line with its international human rights obligations (Lithuania); 122.160. Fully respect the freedoms of expression, opinion, association and peaceful assembly in accordance with Eritrea’s obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Belgium); 122.161. Implement constitutional provisions and international obligations that support the rights to freedom of expression, assembly, association, and religion and provide an opportunity to participate in free, fair, and transparent elections (United States of America); 122.162. Take policy and other measures which ensure the enjoyment of freedom of expression, opinion and assembly (Botswana); 122.163. Take concrete measures to ensure full respect for freedom of expression and of the press and release persons detained for exercising their freedom of expression, or as a result of their political views (Sweden); 122.164. Lift severe restrictions on freedom of expression, both online and offline, and take concrete measures to protect journalists and media workers from violence and arbitrary detention without an official charge (Czech Republic); 122.165. Permit the establishment of independent media outlets (Austria); 122.166. Allow the establishment of private media and issue licences to private broadcasting radio and television stations (Belgium); 122.167. Lift all the restrictions on the rights to freedom of expression and of the press, including Internet freedom and fully implement its obligations in accordance with ICCPR (Estonia); 122.168. Ensure a conducive climate to the work of the human rights defenders, civil society activists and journalists (Tunisia); 122.169. Continue its endeavours to ensure access to food for all its citizens as a fundamental human right (Egypt); 122.170. Guarantee the right to food through self-sufficiency production projects, eliminating in this manner all forms of quotas and limits imposed by the State, and additionally enabling access to the various international organizations and United Nations agencies that work on all aspects of sustainable development and food security (Mexico); 122.171. Continue its efforts to realize the goals of poverty reduction and universal access to primary education (Bhutan); 122.172. Continue to eliminate poverty, improve people’s life and make efforts to fulfill the Millennium Development Goals (China); 122.173. Continue its efforts in protecting the rights of disadvantaged children and redouble its efforts towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals (Yemen); 122.174. Improve legal measures on poverty eradication and an adequate standard of living (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 122.175. Intensify efforts to achieve Millennium Development Goals 4, 5 and 6 in the shortest possible time (Chile); 122.176. Redouble its efforts to meet Millennium Development Goal 1 to eradicate extreme hunger and poverty (Malaysia); 122.177. Pursue the efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals (Algeria); 122.178. Continue progress towards the eradication of poverty, through the application of its laudable social policies, so as to improve the quality of life of its people, in particular in the areas most in need, with the cooperation and assistance as requested by this sovereign nation (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 122.179. Continue its efforts on health, education and social service system, in order to help the vulnerable and disabled people particularly women and children (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 122.180. Give continuity and strengthen positive measures underway to increase the quality and accessibility of health services for all citizens (Cuba); 122.181. Continue its current efforts to provide sustainable health care that is effective, efficient, accessible, acceptable and affordable to all citizens (Egypt); 122.182. In cooperation with the World Health Organization (WHO), continue to improve its domestic healthcare system and provide quality healthcare services to its people (Singapore); 122.183. Train more professional health workers to fill and carry out the work of the newly established health centres (Uganda); 122.184. Continue to implement programs aimed at improving the quality of and access to education, giving particular attention to the needs of children from underprivileged families, including those in the rural and underserved areas (Philippines); 122.185. Allocate more resources to the education system, particularly education of girls, in order to achieve a successful social development level (Turkey); 122.186. Put an end to the obligation for children to follow their last year of school in the military camp of Sawa (Belgium); 122.187. Ensure that high school students do not have to undergo compulsory military training (Luxembourg); 122.188. Abolish the procedure whereby all children must undertake the final year of schooling in a military training camp and fully respect the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict (Portugal); 122.189. Give priority to providing access to the right to education in all parts of the country (Sudan); 122.190. Take further measures to guarantee access to education at all levels, in particular at university level (Afghanistan); 122.191. Continue to strengthen current positive efforts aimed at increasing the rates of school enrolment of its citizens, with particular emphasis on boys and girls (Cuba); 122.192. Consider taking measures which include the conducting of public awareness campaigns, and the awarding of financial or other incentives to parents to send their daughters to school (Egypt); 122.193. Launch awareness campaigns in order to encourage parents to send their children to school including girls (Togo); 122.194. Improve access to the right to education and eliminate disparities in this respect, whether regional, socioeconomic or based on ethnicity or gender (Luxembourg); 122.195. Ensure safe repatriation and reintegration of Eritrean nationals without any fear of persecution in accordance with Eritrea’s obligations under international human rights law and allow for international monitoring (Germany); 122.196. Take further measures to ensure protection of property rights, pursuant to international standards, including the provisions in articles 14 and 21 of the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights and article 5 of CERD (Italy); 122.197. Develop an institutional programme in partnership with the Eritrean diaspora and local communities to develop programmes for production, infrastructure and social development, and eliminate the fee for residing outside of Eritrea (Mexico); 122.198. Work with the international community to reduce the effects of climate change (Uganda); 122.199. That the working group adopts the report of the UPR of Eritrea (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 122.200. Provide them with the appropriate technical assistance in order to enhance their capacities in this aspect (Saudi Arabia). 123. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as being endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex 
[English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of Eritrea was headed by H.E. Mr. Tesfamicael Gerahtu, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the State of Eritrea to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and composed of: • Mr. Mussa Hussien Naib, Director General, Ministry of Education; • Mr. Amanuel Giorgio, Deputy Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of the 
State of Eritrea to the United Nations, New York; 
• Mr. Adem Osman, Second Secretary, Permanent Mission of the State of Eritrea to 
the United Nations, Geneva; 
• Ms. Tibe Kindia, Legal Advisor, Office of the Minister, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Ghebremedhin Mehari, Staff, Permanent Mission of the State of Eritrea to the 
United Nations, Geneva. 
