  United Nations  A/HRC/28/14    General Assembly  Distr.: General 12 December 2014  Original: English  Human Rights Council Twenty-eighth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   Iraq Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–126 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–29 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  30–126 6  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  127–128 13  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  27   Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its twentieth session from 27 October to 7 November 2014. The review of Iraq was held at the 12th meeting on 3 November 2014. The delegation of Iraq was headed by Abdulkareem Abdulah Shallal Al-Janabi, Deputy Minister of Human Rights. At its 17th meeting held on 6 November 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on Iraq. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Iraq: Burkina Faso, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the United Arab Emirates. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Iraq: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/IRQ/1);  (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/IRQ/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/IRQ/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, the Czech Republic, Germany, Liechtenstein, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Iraq through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR).  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The head of the delegation said that strictly monitored local, regional and national elections had been held in 2013 and 2014. Their success had met with international acclaim. Minorities were represented by means of quotas in the Council of Representatives and in local and governorate councils. 6. A governmental committee chaired by the Ministry of Human Rights had been established to prepare the UPR report. It was composed of representatives of the General Secretariat of the Council of Ministers, several ministries and the Kurdistan region. A number of workshops and training courses had been organized for the Committee members and ministry focal points. Consultations had been held with the High Commission for Human Rights of Iraq, the Independent Commission for Human Rights in the Kurdistan Region and representatives of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in Baghdad and the Kurdistan region.  7. Since the first UPR cycle, Iraq had ratified the ICPPED, CAT and CRPD. It had withdrawn its reservation to article 9 of CEDAW, and the Council of Representatives was currently considering the possibility of ratifying ICRMW. Iraq had also acceded to other international treaties which focused, inter alia, on combating terrorism, hostage-taking, child abduction and the illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms. 8. With regard to overdue reports to treaty bodies, CEDAW and CERD had discussed reports from Iraq in 2014 and national committees had been set up to implement their recommendations.  9. Iraq and the Kurdistan region had enacted a number of laws aimed at promoting and protecting human rights since the first UPR cycle, including the Journalists’ Rights Act. In addition, strategic plans had been adopted to support education, health care and employment and to combat poverty and corruption.  10. Iraq had established the Court of Human Rights, the Court on Publishing and the Media and the Family Court. Four courts dealt with cases of domestic violence, and complaints from the High Commission for Human Rights could be channelled to the Chief Public Prosecutor through a department in the Office of the Public Prosecutor. 11. Iraq had issued three reports containing statistical data and reporting on progress towards achieving the eight Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015. Considerable progress had been made in combating poverty, increasing school enrolment and lowering infant and child mortality rates. 12. With regard to the empowerment of women, there were currently 83 women members of the Council of Representatives out of a total of 328 members. The fact that 22 of the women concerned had been elected without relying on the quota system reflected increased awareness of women’s potential. Support was also provided for women’s economic empowerment, for instance through the High Commission for the Advancement of Women in Rural Areas.  13. Iraq had adopted a National Strategy to Combat Violence against Women and a national action plan to implement Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security.  14. Major challenges in the area of children’s rights included street children, child labour, early marriage and internally displaced children. The unstable situation in the country since 2003 made it extremely difficult to ensure the speedy implementation of CRC, OP-CRC-AC and OP-CRC-SC. However, the relevant authorities were taking vigorous action to address the challenges by enacting legislation and establishing the requisite institutions. The Ministry of Education offered special support to gifted students. A law enacted in 2001 had provided for the creation of schools for gifted children in the different governorates. The Ministry of Health had created paediatric hospitals and child psycho-neurological centres. It had organized, with international assistance, special training courses in the treatment of child mental and behavioural disorders for medical staff.  15. Pursuant to the Act concerning persons with disabilities, Iraq was currently establishing an agency to support the rights of people with disabilities. They would be allocated a quota of jobs in public institutions and measures would be taken to equip buildings with the requisite access facilities. Support would also be provided for training centres for persons with disabilities.  16. A number of measures had been taken on behalf of minorities, for instance allocation of plots of land for the construction of new places of worship, restoration and rebuilding of places of worship damaged by terrorist acts and compensation of members of minority groups exposed to terrorist attacks. Minorities were also granted quotas in the Council of Representatives and local councils. Anyone who sought to force members of minorities to change their nationality was liable to prosecution.  17. The National Human Rights Plan was designed, inter alia, to serve as a tool for sound public administration, good governance and the strengthening of the rule of law, to promote a culture of tolerance of cultural and ethnic diversity, to generate awareness of human rights in the Government and in society as a whole, and to mobilize local and international resources through technical cooperation programmes.  18. The current Government’s programme was based on constitutional principles and the National Development Plan (2013–2017). Its priorities included the promotion of decentralized administration. The State’s civil, military and security institutions would be reconstructed, using advanced techniques and electronic governance with a view to increasing productivity and combating corruption. Financial resources would be increased and used to promote equitable development. The principles of responsibility and accountability would be promoted at all levels through the establishment of performance indicators and standards and regular monitoring arrangements. The monitoring bodies would also be subject to oversight. A clear distinction would be made between political and administrative positions, and executive institutions would be free from political influence. The scope of the social welfare and retirement systems would be expanded. Weapons would be confined to State security institutions and the formation of non-State military groups would be prohibited. The security forces would be required to assume full responsibility for the protection of Iraqi citizens. The Government was committed to the basic principles set forth in the political agreement concluded between the political blocs constituting the national unity Government. 19. ISIL had taken advantage of the unstable security situation in a number of governorates, threatening the right to life of their innocent and unarmed inhabitants. ISIL had committed flagrant war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. Women had been sold as slaves, sexually exploited and forcibly married. Journalists and human rights defenders had been attacked. Persons belonging to religious and ethnic minorities, including children, had been executed. A massacre of Iraqi soldiers had been committed at a military base. Places of worship and historical and cultural sites had been destroyed.  20. The situation in the governorates that had been exposed to the brutal terrorist assaults called for the adoption of an emergency action plan, particularly to deal with the problem of displacement. Displaced people required, in particular, accommodation and educational facilities. The Ministry of Migration and Displacement had been working with governmental and non-governmental organizations to alleviate their problems. However, the scale of the crisis called for the involvement of the international community. The elimination of terrorism in Iraq with international support would enable the displaced persons to return to their homes.  21. According to the Ministry, 436,635 families had been displaced by 14 October 2014. The High Commission for Relief and Shelter had been established to deal with the problem and had been allocated a budget of trillion Iraqi dinars (ID). The Ministry of Migration and Displacement would allocate a sum of ID 1 million to each displaced family. ID 33 billion had been allocated to the Red Crescent Society and to religious endowments to assist displaced families and ID 10 billion had been allocated to the Ministry of Health to provide them with health care. Requests submitted by the governorates to set up camps and shelters would be studied and referred to the relevant technical committees.  22. Iraq would establish a national task force to implement the recommendations of the second UPR cycle. It would also establish national mechanisms for the implementation of recommendations of human rights treaty bodies following the submission of periodic reports. 23. The delegation highlighted the mass displacement caused by the ongoing war in the Syrian Arab Republic, and by the actions of the terrorist organization ISIL. The delegation also referred to the violent treatment of Yazidi Kurds by ISIL, as thousands of Yazidi men had been slaughtered and thousands of Yazidi women/girls and children had been taken as sex slaves. Such acts clearly constituted crimes against humanity involving the intention to commit ethnic cleansing and genocide.  24. The delegation said that one great challenge for the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) was how to deal with the 1.5 million refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs). The delegation noted that the KRG had displayed willingness, taken initiatives and established benchmarks aimed at further enhancing its legal and political institutions in the past few years.  25. The delegation stated that the Law on Combating Domestic Violence had been enacted in 2011. The law prohibited female genital mutilation (FGM) and criminalized forced and child marriages, verbal, physical and psychological abuse of girls and women, child abuse and child labour. It also established four courts to deal with domestic violence, women’s shelters and specialized ongoing training for judges and police offers. A quota system to ensure women’s participation in politics had been established. FGM had been decreasing each year. 26. Provision had been made for equal political participation of minorities in the Parliament of Kurdistan and the municipal councils. 27. On media freedom, the delegation stated that there were vibrant local media and that criticism of government policies was common. The 2008 Press Freedom Law together with other legislation guaranteed the balanced practical exercise of the right.  28. Government transparency was another important step forward. The draft constitution on demonstrations enshrined international law, and public demonstrations in cities were permitted and practiced. 29. On the detention issue, the delegation stated that the Judicial Council had set up special courts to investigate human rights concerns in all prisons in the Kurdistan region. Their purpose was to speed up the judicial proceedings relating to prolonged detention issues. Conditions in detention facilities had also been improved.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 30. During the interactive dialogue, 90 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 31. The Islamic Republic of Iran commended government efforts to promote and protect human rights, while condemning terrorist and Takfiri groups’ activities that led to human rights violations. 32. Ireland welcomed and encouraged continued reductions in child mortality rates. Ireland expressed concern at legislation identifying the commission of an offence with honourable motives as a mitigating excuse. 33. Israel noted the need for constitutional reform. It deplored restrictions on freedom of expression and condemned legal provisions promoting the forced, early and temporary marriage of young girls.  34. Italy noted the deteriorating situation for religious minorities. Italy, while welcoming the criminalization of FGM in the Kurdistan region, was concerned that provisions of the Jaafari Personal Status Law contradicted the rights of children and women.  35. Japan expressed concern about the large number of persons displaced by the terrorist activities of ISIL and urged all parties concerned to observe relevant international human rights and humanitarian law.  36. Jordan welcomed the enhancement of institutional and legal frameworks for human rights, including the adoption of several laws on trafficking and persons with special needs. Jordan welcomed the Iraqi accession to CAT. 37. Kazakhstan noted accession to international instruments, and expressed appreciation of strengthened institutional structures to promote and protect human rights. 38. Kuwait commended Iraqi efforts to draft the national report, despite the delicate situation faced and efforts to achieve the MDGs by the 2015 deadline. 39. Kyrgyzstan commended measures on women’s rights, including the National Strategy to Combat Violence against Women and efforts to empower women, including by encouraging their participation in governance. 40. Latvia commended the steps taken by the Government of Iraq to establish the High Commission for Human Rights. 41. Lebanon commended Iraq for enacting legislation to protect NGOs and the rights of journalists and to combat human trafficking, and had adopted policies to combat poverty and violence against women, despite security challenges. 42. Malaysia welcomed the formulation of the National Human Rights Plan and establishment of the National High Commission for Human Rights. 43. Maldives welcomed the ratification of CRPD and hoped for the quick adoption of the draft legislation on domestic violence. It noted progress, despite remnants of dictatorship and the constant threat of terrorism. 44. Mauritania noted Iraqi commitment, including by ratifying a number of international human rights instruments such as CEDAW, ICERD, ICCPR and OP-CRC-AC. 45. Montenegro asked how the High Commission for Human Rights would be brought into compliance with the Paris Principles and how minimum standards were respected with regard to the death penalty. 46. Morocco commended the efforts despite the security situation and noted the benefit drawn from the previous UPR by; inter alia, the establishment of the Court for Human Rights, the High Commission for Human Rights, the complaint procedure and transitional justice institutions. 47. Namibia commended action to combat sectarian and ethnic divisions in the face of insurgency and encouraged the investigation of alleged violations of international humanitarian and human rights law and rebuild reconciliation. 48. The Netherlands appreciated the Iraqi accession to CAT. It noted the perpetration of crimes against humanity by violent extremists and persistent impunity in some areas. 49. Nicaragua commended Iraqi achievements in restoring the rule of law and its efforts to bring about social, political and economic change within a national reconstruction and reconciliation process. 50. Nigeria applauded the establishment of human rights institutions, notably the Ministry of Human Rights, and the adoption of the Social Protection Act, while noting the brutal campaign of ISIL. 51. Norway encouraged the Government to make human rights implementation a priority for stability and reconciliation in Iraq, particularly given the threat posed by extremist groups, including ISIL. 52. Oman noted Iraqi security challenges which undermine the enjoyment of human rights. Nevertheless, Iraq made progress by acceding to a number of human rights instruments and the adoption of legislation and strategies. 53. Pakistan, noting the severe security challenges faced by Iraq, welcomed accession to several international human rights instruments and the adoption of the strategy to combat violence against women to help eliminate discrimination against women. 54. Paraguay, concerned by the situation of religious minorities, asked whether Iraq had considered removing information on religion from identity documents. 55. The Philippines took note of the National Human Rights Plan and the National Strategy to Combat Violence against Women and asked for details of their implementation. 56. Poland noted the grave human rights situation in Iraq and welcomed its efforts to address serious challenges, such as the persecution of minorities by ISIL and other terrorist groups, and highlighted the importance of protecting children. 57. Portugal was concerned by rights violations suffered by Iraqi women and the use of the death penalty. It welcomed the plan to implement Security Council resolution 1325 and withdrawal of a reservation to CEDAW. 58. The Republic of Korea was concerned that the rule of law had not yet taken root in Iraq, impeding effective implementation of human rights policies and legislation, and at the suffering of IDPs as ISIL gained strength across the country. 59. Romania commended Iraqi ratification of various human rights conventions and its invitation to Human Rights Council special procedures, and encouraged it to continue advancing the human rights agenda. 60. The Russian Federation welcomed efforts for inter-ethnic and interreligious dialogue and expressed concern about grave violations of human rights and international humanitarian law in connection with ISIL. 61. Senegal urged the international community and all United Nations agencies to support Iraq and encouraged the Iraqi people to unite in order to bring an end to violence. 62. Serbia encouraged Iraq to protect IDPs and work towards national reconciliation in the fight against terrorism and urged ratifying OP-CAT and OP-CEDAW. 63. Sierra Leone was concerned by the internal conflict in Iraq. It commended efforts to provide social services and urged Iraq to undertake reforms eliminating discrimination. 64. Singapore strongly condemned the actions of ISIS. Singapore hoped that the new cabinet would bring long-term stability and security to Iraq and noted its progress regarding women’s welfare and equality and actions combating gender violence.  65. Slovakia noted the ratification of several treaties and was seriously concerned by the deteriorating human rights in areas seized by IS militants, particularly the harsh persecution of religious minorities. 66. Slovenia encouraged Iraq to continue with national reconciliation as a prerequisite for maintaining Iraqi sovereignty and territorial integrity and noted the absence of progress in abolishing the death penalty. 67. Spain reiterated its support to Iraq and its reform process. It commended Iraqi ratification of CAT and was concerned by the recent increase in executions. 68. Sri Lanka noted Iraqi efforts to guarantee economic, social and cultural rights despite the challenges caused by the security situation. It welcomed the adoption of the National Strategy to Combat Terrorism which gave priority to human rights considerations. 69. The State of Palestine welcomed the efforts to reduce poverty but the impact of poverty on children was of concern. It noted progress achieved through the enactment of legislation and adopting strategies, such as the national strategy for education and higher education, and strategy for illiteracy.  70. The Sudan appreciated the efforts made, particularly on the rights of women and children with disabilities, through the adoption of the National Strategy to Combat the Violence against Women, and the maternal and child health-care strategy, and the accession to CRPD.  71. Sweden was concerned by the situation regarding Iraqi women’s rights and encouraged the Government to overcome differences between political parties so as to focus on helping displaced persons. 72. Switzerland was concerned by the committed and continuing human rights violations perpetrated by the IS, but also by the Iraqi Armed Forces and the increasing use of the death penalty, often without due process. 73. Tajikistan noted measures adopted by the Government, particularly the national human rights plan that would promote respect for rights in all areas of life. 74. Thailand remained concerned at violence and discrimination against women and girls. Thailand condemned the systematic violation of human rights by ISIL and associated armed and urged all parties involved in the conflict to comply with international humanitarian law.  75. The head of delegation reported that the High Commission for Human Rights was functioning and implementing its mandate, including to receive and investigate complaints, monitor, write reports and, at the same time, submit recommendations to the Government. The Government had issued guidelines to all ministries instructing them to cooperate with the Commission. The Commission had already conducted many programmes and activities, including on freedom of expression, supporting the media and civil society. It had suggested the creation of a specialized human rights tribunal. The Government continued providing support to the Commission, to enable it to undertake its role effectively. 76. On women’s rights, the delegation stated that a national team had been formed to implement the recommendations of CEDAW. The draft Jaafari law had been withdrawn. On violence against women, Iraq had started implementing the National Strategy against Violence. Four areas were identified by the National Plan of Action to implement Security Council resolution 1325. On early, temporary and informal marriage, the statute established the age of marriage as 15 years for boys and girls only by judicial decision, otherwise it was 18 years. It sanctioned forced marriage. 77. The delegation emphasized that the Iraqi Constitution in its article 37, paragraph 1 (c), banned torture and compensation to victims, while article 333 of the Penal Law provided for the criminalization and punishment of any form of torture by public servants. In 2008, Iraq established a committee under the Ministry of Human Rights to harmonize Iraqi legislation with the provisions of CAT. Given the very specific circumstances that prevailed on the security front, officials and officers might have conducted actions that are not compatible with human rights. The officials were held accountable and subjected to disciplinary sanctions, the most severe of which were dismissal and referral of the case to the courts. Over 516 cases during 2008–2014 were documented, with many of those cases having been prosecuted. A number of commissions had been established to look into complaints of torture. The measures taken by the Ministry of Human Rights to address torture consisted of direct on-site monitoring and serious follow-up action. The Ministry also received complaints either directly from persons alleging torture or from their relatives. In addition, it contacted the Judicial Council (Office of the Chief Public Prosecutor) to request a legal investigation and decision so that offenders can be held to account. It also contacted the Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of Defence with a view to creating investigation boards to rule on cases involving allegations of torture. Detention and deprivation of liberty were subject to oversight by the Ministry of Human Rights, the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of the Interior and the judiciary to ensure human rights were being respected in places of detention. A number of executive measures had been introduced to ensure compliance with international commitments through training courses for persons working in the Ministry of Justice and law enforcement. Human rights were taught in police academies and institutions. 78. The delegation stated that the Constitution of Iraq states that education is the foundation of progress and provides that education and teaching must be free and compulsory. The plan for 2011–2020 focused on five priorities relating to the institutional framework, legal framework, quality education and funding of the education sector. In 2011 Iraq had adopted an act on illiteracy and established literacy centres in different administrative areas of Iraq. Human rights training was provided through education in different parts of the country. 79. In 2003, Iraq reviewed its legislation on the death penalty; however, exceptional circumstances were prevailing in the country, with men and women being killed daily in attacks. Given the circumstances, abolishing the death penalty called for a balance between the existing attitude and the situation that prevailed. The situation at the present time meant that human rights were not always respected. Iraq wished to review the application of death penalty and had established a department in the Ministry of Human Rights to look into the issue in the future. It was hoped that the penalty could be restricted to the gravest of crimes. 80. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia welcomed Iraqi ratifications and hoped that those commitments continued to be upheld, urged continued cooperation with all special procedures and encouraged full cooperation with the OHCHR investigative mission in Iraq. 81. Togo called for the perpetrators of violations of international human rights and humanitarian law to be held to account. It welcomed efforts to achieve the MDGs. 82. Tunisia welcomed the ratification of CAT, ICCPED and CRPD, the issuing of a standing invitation to special procedure mandate holders, and support for the empowerment of women. 83. Turkey noted efforts to improve human rights standards despite the dire security situation stemming from ISIL. It commended efforts to establish an inclusive, representative and cross-sectarian Government. 84. Turkmenistan welcomed action undertaken to improve the human rights situation in Iraq, noting accession to CRPD and the introduction of national legislation aimed at protecting human rights. 85. The United Arab Emirates noted with satisfaction the creation of a family court and four other courts on family violence, a national human rights centre and a supreme institute for the judiciary in Kurdistan. 86. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland noted with concern that the human rights situation had deteriorated. It welcomed commitments to inclusivity, protecting Iraqi citizens and holding those responsible for human rights violations to account. 87. The United States of America deplored the humanitarian crisis caused by ISIL, and urged Iraq to address past violations of international humanitarian and human rights law. 88. Uruguay noted Iraqi adoption of human rights treaties and legislation, and its strategies and national plans addressing particularly vulnerable groups. 89. Uzbekistan commended the accession to CAT and CRPD, and the adoption of national strategies to tackle poverty, gender-based violence and corruption, and improving health and education systems and employment. 90. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela noted that the country’s current situation stemmed from the 2003 invasion. The country required international support to consolidate and build its human rights capacities. 91. Viet Nam noted legislation to protect human rights and the National Human Rights Plan. It commended steps to tackle terrorism and all forms of violence. 92. Yemen commended the adoption of the Act on combating human trafficking, the Journalists’ Rights Act and the Act concerning the welfare of persons with disabilities and special needs. 93. Afghanistan commended Iraqi commitment to fundamental human rights principles, despite immense security challenges, and welcomed the establishment of the High Commission for Human Rights. 94. Algeria commended Iraqi efforts, including the accession to human rights instruments and adoption of legislation and policies for the promotion and protection of human rights. 95. Angola noted that the ongoing situation in Iraq hindered the enjoyment of human rights. It noted with interest efforts to focus on the population’s health and education. 96. Argentina referred to the security and humanitarian situation. It noted that particular attention should be paid to the situation of minority groups in Iraq and recognized the authorities’ efforts to tackle violence towards them. 97. Australia commended the holding of democratic elections. It remained concerned by human rights abuses perpetrated by terrorists, militias and others, against civilians, and at increasing recourse to the death penalty. 98. Austria expressed concern about reports that religious minorities had come under attack by ISIL and abductions and executions perpetrated by other forces. It expressed concern about the rising numbers of refugees and IDPs and violence against journalists. 99. Azerbaijan congratulated Iraq on its strengthened legal framework and national institutional infrastructure for the promotion and protection of human rights. It commended the standing invitation issued to the United Nations human rights mechanisms. 100. Bahrain applauded Iraqi national plans to promote and protect human rights and the creation of human rights-related institutions, incorporated with the public and social society organizations. 101. Bangladesh welcomed the establishment of human rights institutions, ratification of CRPD and action to reduce gender disparities. It took note of challenges to ensure human rights, including poverty and terrorist attacks. 102. Belgium expressed shock at attacks on civilians. It noted with concern the precarious situation of religious and ethnic minorities, particularly Christians and Yazidis. 103. Bhutan noted that, despite significant challenges, progress had been made in the development of institutional structures for human rights, such as the National Centre for Human Rights. 104. Botswana noted Iraqi progress regarding school enrolment, child and infant mortality and poverty eradication. It noted ethnic divisions, the rise in religious extremism and an increase of human rights violations. It was concerned by reported sexual violence and forced child recruitment. 105. Brazil noted that human rights should not be overlooked in the face of the security situation in Iraq and commended the Government’s efforts to overcome the challenges. It stated the importance of promoting human rights for a peaceful future. 106. Bulgaria commended the country’s development of its institutional structures, including the establishment of the High Commission for Human Rights. It noted the National Strategy to Combat Violence against Women. It expressed concerned regarding the situation of women in detention and children recruited into armed conflict. 107. Burkina Faso commended Iraqi efforts to promote human rights, particularly of minorities. It encouraged the international community to continue supporting the country’s efforts to ensure lasting peace. 108. Canada asked for information on progress regarding review of conditions in detention facilities, the invitation of the Special Rapporteur on the question of torture and the abolition of the death penalty. 109. Chile recognized Iraqi efforts to restore its institutions to protect its citizens in a particularly difficult setting, and urged it to persevere in its efforts to guarantee human rights. 110. China commended Iraqi efforts to fight terrorism, promote national reconciliation and protect women, children and ethnic minorities, and efforts to achieve MDGs. It noted the reduction in poverty and infant mortality rates, and increasing school enrolment and women’s employment. China recognized difficulties in economic development. 111. Costa Rica expressed concern about deterioration in human rights and urged Iraq to continue its efforts to strengthen its institutions and implement national strategies to reduce poverty and combat gender-based violence and corruption. It condemned the attack against Camp Liberty. 112. Cuba noted Iraqi progress in implementing previous UPR recommendations and its efforts to overcome the current situation, which was closely related to the 2003 unjustified aggression against Iraq. 113. The Czech Republic thanked Iraq for its report and opening statement. 114. Denmark commended Iraqi efforts to improve human rights but remained concerned by intimidation of and violence against ethnic and religious minorities committed by ISIL and others. 115. Djibouti commended Iraqi efforts to promote human rights in the face of multiple challenges. 116. Egypt noted that instability and insecurity with the terrorism activities were direct causes of the suffering of the Iraqis. Despite that, the Government was able to establish several human rights institutions and enacted a number of related legislation and established a national human rights institution. 117. Estonia commended Iraqi progress in many human rights areas, including ratification of international instruments, but remained concerned about ongoing violations of human rights and humanitarian law by ISIL and other extremist groups, and about women in detention. Estonia urged Iraq to abolish the death penalty and ensure security for persons in Camp Liberty. 118. France acknowledged efforts made since the first review. It encouraged Iraq to make the necessary reforms to consolidate the rule of law and aid all persons in the country. 119. Germany was deeply concerned about the human rights situation. It condemned the human rights abuses committed by ISIL and supported the Government’s efforts. Germany asked how Iraq would protect freedom of religion and address religious and sectarian tensions, and whether it would remove information on religion from identity cards. 120. Greece condemned the human rights abuses committed by the so-called Islamic State. It commended the changes to the normative and institutional framework relating to human rights. 121. Guatemala welcomed legislative progress on trafficking in persons and persons with disabilities. It expressed concern about Iraqi women’s ability to transmit their nationality to children born outside the country and the severe restrictions placed on Camp Liberty residents. 122. Hungary noted that religious and ethnic minorities must participate in democratic structures and that their rights must be protected. It was concerned by serious crimes against them committed by the so-called Islamic State, which must be brought to justice. 123. India commended legislative measures and the establishment of national human rights institutions. It welcomed progress in reducing infant and maternal mortality, and efforts to protect women from violence.  124. Indonesia commended the implementation of various human rights policies, including the National Action Plan of Human Rights, and encouraged Iraq to strengthen those measures. It noted progress on women’s rights, education, juvenile justice and human rights institutions.  125. Mexico noted the measures adopted to eliminate violence against women, including the High Commission for Family Protection and the National Strategy to Combat Violence against Women. 126. In conclusion, Iraq thanked all delegations for their contributions during the interactive dialogue. As acknowledged by all delegations Iraq was going through exceptional circumstances, and it appreciated the readiness of States to provide assistance in addressing those challenges. The head of delegation emphasized the principles enshrined in the Constitution of equal rights of all citizens without discrimination and highlighted the importance of protecting minorities that are an integral part of the Iraqi society. He emphasized the independence of the High Commission for Human Rights. He noted the cooperation with Special Rapporteur on the question of torture in arranging the visit. The delegation assured delegations of Iraqi commitment to the UPR process and thanked all delegations for their active participation in the interactive dialogue.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**  ** Conclusions and recommendations will not be edited. 127. The following recommendations will be examined by Iraq which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-eighth session of the Human Rights Council in March 2015: 127.1 Pursue the process of acceding to international instruments (Djibouti); 127.2 Consider the possibility of acceding to the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Uzbekistan); 127.3 Accede to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aimed at abolishing the death penalty (Chile); 127.4 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Paraguay); 127.5 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Portugal); 127.6 Establish a moratorium with a view to abolishing the death penalty and ratifying the Second Optional Protocol of ICCPR (Sierra Leone); 127.7 Establish a moratorium to the death penalty and, sign and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Spain); 127.8 Establish a formal moratorium on the death penalty with a view to ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Australia); 127.9 Ratify the Optional Protocols to ICCPR, CEDAW and CAT (Austria); 127.10 Ratify the Optional Protocol to CAT and the Optional Protocol to ICESCR (Uruguay); 127.11 Ratify, without reservations, the Optional Protocol to ICESCR and the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, as well as its 1967 Protocol (Portugal); 127.12 Seek to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention to the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Chile); 127.13 Expedite the ratification of the Optional Protocol to CEDAW (Portugal); 127.14 Ratify the Optional Protocol to CEDAW (Greece); 127.15 Ratify the Optional Protocol to CEDAW and withdraw reservations to article 2 (f) and (g) of CEDAW (Paraguay); 127.16 Revoke reservations concerning articles 2 and 16 of CEDAW, and ensure that all women in Iraq are protected from discrimination (Germany); 127.17 Remove its remaining reservations to CEDAW (Portugal); 127.18 Ratify the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention against Torture (Bulgaria); 127.19 Ratify the Optional Protocol to CAT (Togo), (Paraguay); 127.20 Ratify the Optional Protocol to CAT (Sierra Leone); 127.21 Ratify ICRMW (Sierra Leone); 127.22 Ensure the equitable treatment of all people through an improved justice system and increased respect for human rights within the police and security forces, including the ratification of OP-CAT (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 127.23 Take further measures to prevent torture including acceding to the Optional Protocol to CAT and establishing a national preventive mechanism accordingly (Czech Republic); 127.24 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (Bulgaria); 127.25 Consider ratifying the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Romania); 127.26 Ratify Rome Statute and the Optional Protocol to CAT and prosecute and punish those who committed violations to International Humanitarian Law and Human Rights Law (Tunisia); 127.27 Accede to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC) (Serbia); accede to the Rome Statute of ICC (Slovenia); ratify the Rome Statute of ICC (Germany); ratify the Rome Statute of ICC (Poland); ratify the Rome Statute of ICC (Hungary); 127.28 Ratify or accede to the Rome Statute of ICC and to implement it fully at national level and to accede to the Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of ICC (Slovakia); 127.29 Ratify the Rome Statute on the International Criminal Court and its Agreement on Privileges and Immunities (Belgium); 127.30 Accede and fully align its national legislation with the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Estonia); 127.31 Accede to the Rome Statue to fully align its national legislation with the Rome Statute and to investigate and prosecute international crimes effectively before its national courts or enable the International Criminal Court to investigate these crimes (Netherlands); 127.32 Accede to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and incorporate it in the national legislation; and to the Convention on the Non-Applicability of Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity (Uruguay); 127.33 Accept the ad hoc jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court and ratify the Rome Statute (Switzerland); 127.34 Fight impunity for all perpetrators of violations and ratify the Rome Statute (France); 127.35 Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Guatemala); 127.36 Take any proper measure in order to keep national legislation fully in line with international standards and obligations (Italy); 127.37 Continue to strengthen its domestic legal system and enforcement measures to secure a safe living environment for its people (Singapore); 127.38 Organize the work for the adoption of rigorous measures that will contribute to improving the country’s legislation in line with international obligations in the field of human rights (Tajikistan); 127.39 Maintain efforts towards ensuring the full domestic implementation of the provisions of CEDAW and align all domestic laws with human rights instruments, which Iraq is a State party to (Namibia); 127.40 Abolish and amend all laws that encourage and permit the practice of forced, early and temporary marriages of young girls (Israel); 127.41 Continue stepping up efforts to establish an independent National Human Rights Institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Malaysia); 127.42 Continue its practice of further strengthening the national human rights institution (Pakistan); 127.43 Continue its efforts to strengthen the role of independent bodies for human rights (Yemen); 127.44 Take concrete measures to guarantee the independence of the High Commission for Human Rights in accordance with the Paris Principles (Philippines); 127.45 Ensure that the High Commission for Human Rights functions in accordance with the Paris Principles (India); 127.46 Ensure the Commission’s independence in accordance with the Paris Principles (Afghanistan); 127.47 Provide constitutional bodies, such as the National Human Rights Commission, and relevant government entities with the necessary mandate to effectively investigate and document all crimes against ethnic and religious minorities with a view to prosecuting those responsible (Denmark); 127.48 Continue to strengthen the various mechanisms and institutions in the judicial as well as governmental level to promote and protect as well as monitor human rights, including strengthening the High Commission for Human Rights in line with the Paris Principles (Indonesia); 127.49 Consider joining the International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions (Afghanistan); 127.50 Put into place and build the capacity of an independent Human Rights Commission to highlight human rights violations (Sweden); 127.51 Consider the establishment of an office of the Ombudsman for Children’s Rights devoted purely to the protection of the rights of the child (Poland); 127.52 Efficiently implement recently ratified international conventions, especially in the field of child rights (Kazakhstan); 127.53 Further enhance measures, in cooperation with the international community, to protect and promote the rights of the child, including through strengthening the educational system and the provision of adequate food, housing and health services (Sri Lanka); 127.54 Continue to adopt programmes that provide basic services to children, including health care, housing and education (State of Palestine); 127.55 Exert more efforts towards strengthening the rights of the child through the adoption of a national policy for children (Sudan); 127.56 Adopt and implement, through an inclusive and a participatory process, national policies for the promotion and protection of children’s rights, with a particular focus on the right to an adequate standard of living and the right not to be subjected to any form of discrimination, exploitation or violence (Brazil); 127.57 Undertake additional measures to protect rights of women and children (Viet Nam); 127.58 Continue promoting and protecting the rights of vulnerable people: women, children, the elderly and persons with disabilities (Djibouti); 127.59 Fully and effectively implement all recent changes in the institutional framework related to human rights, including in the area of protection of women, children as well as persons belonging to ethnic and religious minorities (Greece); 127.60 Continue its positive efforts to strengthen the implementation of the National Human Rights Plan by providing the necessary financial and human resources (Malaysia); 127.61 Continue strengthening the implementation of the National Human Rights Plan, to provide an adequate response to the challenges due to the insecurity in the country (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 127.62 Take measures to adopt a human rights action plan and ensure its full implementation (Botswana); 127.63 Continue to work with the international community to address human rights issues set out in the twenty-first UNAMI Interim Human Rights report of 19 August 2014 (Australia); 127.64 Cooperate with the international community in order to strengthen the efforts in solving the humanitarian crises in the country (Russian Federation); 127.65 Continue implementing programmes to improve the way they deal with persons, particularly during security operations and that the Ministry of human rights carry out awareness-raising programmes with the concerned ministries (Bahrain); 127.66 Pursue defending the sovereignty and the territorial integrity of the country without foreign interferences (Cuba); 127.67 Continue its efforts to promote and protect human rights within the country (Latvia); 127.68 Continue training public authorities’ staff on human rights (Lebanon); 127.69 Take necessary steps for capacity-building of employees in the human rights field (Pakistan); 127.70 Continue further efforts to foster the principle of tolerance among various segments of the Iraqi society (Oman); 127.71 Establish and strengthen the basis for national unity and internal security and stability of the State in order to preserve the gene pool of the nation through participation in socio-political activities of all sectors of the population, including women (Tajikistan);  127.72 Continue the practice of implementing programmes aimed at further improving the welfare of the population (Turkmenistan);  127.73 Pursue its national policies as outlined in its national report for its second UPR (Nicaragua); 127.74 Continue its active engagement with the human rights mechanisms of United Nations for the protection and promotion of human rights (Azerbaijan); 127.75 Submit its overdue reports to treaty bodies (United Arab Emirates); 127.76 Set-up a national body with a view to following up on the implementation of the recommendations submitted by CEDAW after the review of Iraq in February 2014 (Jordan); 127.77 Establish a national group to follow-up the implementation of CEDAW recommendations (Kuwait); 127.78 Enhance cooperation with United Nations special procedures (Greece); 127.79 Extend an open invitation to the Special Rapporteurs and to facilitate a visit by the Special Rapporteur on the question of torture (Netherlands); 127.80 Accept the request for a visit made by the Special Rapporteur on the question of torture in March 2014 (Spain); 127.81 Invite the Special Rapporteur on minority issues to visit the country with a view to examine the “ways and means of overcoming existing obstacles to the full and effective realization of their rights” in accordance with her mandate (Belgium); 127.82 Amend and adapt its law to give fair and equal treatment to all citizens, including women and those of religious and ethnic minorities (Israel); 127.83 Eliminate the reported contradictions in the constitutional framework and discriminatory provisions therein against women (Slovenia); 127.84 Amend the discriminatory provisions against women in the legislation and take steps to fight violence against women and harmful practices, such as child marriage and crimes committed in the name of “honour” (Estonia); 127.85 Effectively combat discrimination against women in law and in practice (Togo); 127.86 Review its legislation and practices that are discriminatory against women and step up efforts to eliminate all forms of discrimination and violence against women in all domain of life (Tunisia); 127.87 Continue to take measures for the advancement of women and consider adopting a national policy for the empowerment of women (India); 127.88 Take proper measures to strengthen and enact the legislative framework aiming at protecting the rights of women and to fully implement CEDAW (Italy);  127.89 Pay special attention to the situation of women and to improve their access to public services, education and justice, and to consider acceding to the Optional Protocol to CEDAW (Czech Republic); 127.90 Devote more efforts in the field of harmonizing gender equality for guaranteeing their equal rights (Kazakhstan); 127.91 Continue its efforts aimed at combating the gender gap by ensuring that girls have equal access to school, especially in rural areas (Bhutan); 127.92 Continue to further ensure rights of women and girls (Bangladesh); 127.93 Continue working to guarantee the human rights of women, who continue being victims of abuses and restrictions of their freedoms (Guatemala); 127.94 Improve the situation for and empower women and girls, by creating a more non-discriminatory environment, ensuring equal representation and the right to education, as well as addressing issues such as gender-based violence, including honour crimes, FGM and child marriage (Sweden); 127.95 Adopt and implement, through an inclusive and a participatory process, national policies for the protection of women, including women human rights defenders, against any form of discrimination or violence, committed either in public or at the domestic level (Brazil); 127.96 Effectively apply resolution 1325 of the Security Council concerning women’s participation in decision-making (Chile); 127.97 Implement laws which facilitate access to justice for women in detention, as well as allow women to inherit land and acquire property (Sierra Leone); 127.98 Guarantee equality of civil and political rights. Avoid all forms of discrimination based on ethnicity, religion, gender or sexual orientation (France); 127.99 Continue advancing towards an urgent and lasting peaceful solution to the crisis, with the preservation of its territorial integrity; and with the assistance and international solidarity, that the country requires (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 127.100 Guarantee respect for international humanitarian law and human rights and the protection of the civilian population in the context of military actions (Spain); 127.101 Take all possible measures to guarantee security and protection of civilians, particularly while conducting military operations, and pay special attention to the basic needs of persons (Mexico); 127.102 Ensure that all military actions are in conformity with international law, that the alleged grave violations are thoroughly and impartially investigated and that those responsible are brought to justice (Switzerland); 127.103 Strengthen command and control mechanisms over its military and other security forces and eliminate the presence of militia and other non-governmental armed groups (United States of America); 127.104 Implement its recently enacted National Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security, and in the ongoing conflict with ISIL, take measures to promote the protection of women, including those held captive by ISIL (United States of America); 127.105 Rapidly launch a reform process of its security forces, especially to embed extra-legal militia into the Iraqi security structure (Turkey); 127.106 Continue reform of the Iraqi Armed Forces and Security Services in accordance with article 9(1)(a) of the Iraqi Constitution to include all components of the Iraqi people, creating a force which ensures security and stability for all individuals equally and throughout Iraq, thereby eliminating the need for the use of militias (Canada); 127.107 Take into serious consideration the possibility to introduce a de facto moratorium on the death penalty with a view to its abolition (Italy);  127.108 Consider introducing a de jure moratorium on the death penalty with the view to abolish the death penalty (Namibia); 127.109 Consider a moratorium on the death penalty with a view to abolishing it (Latvia); consider establishing a moratorium on all executions of death penalty, with a view to its abolition (Mexico); consider establishing as a first step a moratorium with a view to abolishing the death penalty (Turkey); announce a moratorium on the death penalty with a view to its eventual abolition (Germany); establish a moratorium on executions in view of abolishing the death penalty (Greece); establish a moratorium on the death penalty with a view to its abolition (France); establish a moratorium on executions and move towards abolishing the death penalty (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); establish an immediate official moratorium on the use of death penalty (Montenegro); 127.110 Place a moratorium on the death penalty with the long-term view of repealing it (Norway); 127.111 Declare an official moratorium on the death penalty (Costa Rica); 127.112 Establish a moratorium on the death penalty (Algeria); implement a moratorium on executions (Austria); 127.113 Commute the sentences of persons sentenced to death and establish a moratorium on executions towards the abolition of the death penalty (Portugal); 127.114 Abolish the death penalty, and in an intermediate phase, adopt an immediate moratorium on executions (Belgium); 127.115 Halt to all executions and establish a moratorium on the death penalty with a view to abolishing capital punishment (Slovenia);  127.116 Honour its pledge to look into abolishing the death penalty (Israel);  127.117 Consider reducing the number of offences for which the death penalty may be imposed (Montenegro); 127.118 Reduce as much as possible the number of offences punishable by the death penalty with a view to limiting the number of death sentences (Switzerland); 127.119 Reform the security and penitentiary systems. Bring an end to extrajudicial executions, arbitrary detentions and the practice of torture. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (France); 127.120 Drive forward legislative reforms and adopt administrative measures to eradicate torture in law and in practice (Costa Rica); 127.121 Investigate promptly allegations of torture and ill-treatment and facilitate visits by the Special Rapporteur on the question of torture to all detention facilities in Iraq (Norway); 127.122 Investigate all allegations of torture (Austria); 127.123 Ensure in practice that all reports of torture or ill-treatment are duly investigated in a prompt, exhaustive, impartial and independent manner, and that those responsible are brought to justice (Spain); 127.124 Do not to admit as evidence confessions obtained through torture or other illegal means (Uruguay); 127.125 Suspend article 128 of the Iraqi Penal Code, as a first step towards the permanent removal from it of honourable motives as a mitigating excuse (Ireland);  127.126 Laws enacted, especially the amendment of the Personal Status Law and the law against domestic violence, be in line with Iraq’s existing international obligations (Thailand); 127.127 Take steps to ensure that national legislation on domestic violence provides appropriate penalties for perpetrators and legal and pyschosocial support to victims, including children (Philippines); 127.128 Adopt the necessary legislation and policies in order to combat violence against women (Romania); 127.129 Further strengthen comprehensive measures addressing all forms of violence against women and girls (Latvia); 127.130 Take necessary measures to implement its national strategy to combat violence against women, and in advancing their rights (Malaysia); 127.131 Continue to combat gender violence and promote equal opportunity for women and girls (Singapore); 127.132 Take steps for ending forced and temporary marriages that entrap girls in sexual and domestic servitude (Kyrgyzstan); 127.133 Abolish temporary marriage, child, early and forced marriage and prosecute “honour” crimes (Sierra Leone); 127.134 Adopt measures to fight violence against women, in particular “honour crimes”, by ensuring that perpetrators are brought to justice, and provide redress measures to victims (Chile); 127.135 Ensure that the draft bill of the Jaafari Personal Status Law and the Personal Status Law of 1959 guarantee equality with regard to women’s human rights in all areas, marriage, divorce, custody and inheritance (Mexico); 127.136 Withdraw the Jaafari law on personal status issues, passed by the Council of Ministers in February 2014, which would legalize child, early and forced marriage and violate the human rights of women and children (Canada); 127.137 Adopt measures aiming at combating effectively the trafficking of persons and the exploitation of women and children (Togo); 127.138 Continue the effective application of anti-trafficking law to prosecute human trafficking and refer victims to protection services (Kyrgyzstan); 127.139 Establish effective mechanisms to investigate, prosecute and punish trafficking offenders (Israel); 127.140 Take appropriate measures for ensuring prosecution for trafficking (Kazakhstan);  127.141 Take additional measures to combat trafficking in persons, in particular women and children and impose appropriate sanctions against perpetrators (Bahrain);  127.142 Ensure the independence of the judiciary, including by investigating allegations of corruption (Austria); 127.143 Guarantee access of all Iraqis to equitable judicial proceedings (France); 127.144 Take measures to secure the rights of due process guaranteed by ICCPR (Norway); 127.145 Reform and strengthen the judiciary to effectively address issues of impunity and victim redress (Botswana); 127.146 Reform the judicial system to guarantee its neutrality and independence and assure access to justice for persons belonging to minorities and vulnerable groups (Germany); 127.147 Take the necessary steps, including a prompt and thorough investigation into human rights violations and abuse cases committed in the country (Republic of Korea); 127.148 Strengthen its criminal investigation and prosecuting capacities in order to prevent and eliminate arbitrary detention and extrajudicial killings (Czech Republic); 127.149 Ensure all reports of human rights abuses, including those against ethnic and religious minorities, women and girls, are fully investigated and prosecuted (Australia); 127.150 Continue training and building the capacity of law enforcement institutions on human rights (Egypt); 127.151 Focus on raising awareness among policy implementers about the rule of law for the purpose of ensuring the human rights of Iraqi citizens, combating corruption and restoring public trust in the Government (Republic of Korea); 127.152. Establish the rule of law and apply it fairly and equally in order to realize national reconciliation (Japan); 127.153 Continue strengthening the national dialogue aiming at true reconciliation and lasting peace (Nicaragua); 127.154 Engender a convivial political atmosphere in order to facilitate speedy reconciliation among all groups, religious and minority (Nigeria); 127.155 Take particular and additional measures to consolidate national unity, stability of internal security and support solidarity to spread the culture of peaceful coexistence and strengthen the values of conciliation (Bahrain); 127.156 Step up its efforts to protect human rights in the territory under its control, to prevent all abuses and to hold those responsible accountable (Italy); 127.157 Pursue its efforts to achieve respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms of all the population, and adopt all necessary measures to guarantee the fight against impunity of perpetrators of crimes, acts of violence and all human rights violations (Argentina); 127.158 Consider adopting the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders or the “Bangkok Rules” to respond to the specific needs of female inmates (Thailand);  127.159 Review national legislation to ensure that children are afforded the necessary protection in the juvenile justice system (Maldives); 127.160 Continue applying special legal measures to juvenile from the detention stage until confinement and enforcement of the sentence, including by considering incorporating restorative justice principles in the juvenile justice system (Indonesia); 127.161 Consider increasing the minimum age of marriage (Latvia); 127.162 Introduce effective measures to prevent and eliminate discrimination and persecution on the grounds of religion or belief (Poland); 127.163 Monitor acts and public statements of hatred against ethnic and religious groups, to take necessary measures to combat them and to bring those responsible before justice, in conformity with international standards (Belgium); 127.164 Strengthen the legal protection of ethnic and religious minorities by drafting new legislation enshrining protections provided for under article 125 of the Iraqi Constitution, and amend the penal code to include stronger penalties against perpetrators who attack places of worship (Canada); 127.165 Bring national legislation in accordance with international standards to fully guarantee freedom of expression, association and assembly (Estonia); 127.166 Guarantee respect of freedom of opinion and expression, by safeguarding the security of journalists and the independence of the media (France); 127.167 Continue to adopt legislation that guarantees freedom of media (Lebanon); 127.168 Revise the existing legislation, in particular the “Protection of Journalists Law number 21” with a view to remove all restrictions on the freedom of the press and to ensure full protection of journalists and other media-workers (Denmark); 127.169 Grant protection and allow journalists, as well as the general public, to exercise their freedom of speech (Israel);  127.170 Investigate killings and violence against journalists and hold perpetrators accountable (Austria); 127.171 Guarantee and create an enabling environment to the activities of the journalists and human rights defenders and civil society (Tunisia); 127.172 Keep on its efforts on poverty reduction through the national anti-poverty strategy (Iran (Islamic Republic of));  127.173 Continue to efforts to reduce poverty through adopting a national strategy to eliminate poverty (Kuwait); 127.174 Continue its efforts to eradicate poverty (Bangladesh); 127.175. Continue to fight poverty through its national poverty reduction strategy (Egypt); 127.176 Continue promoting political dialogue and national reconciliation in order to create conditions for economic development and promote the economic, social and cultural rights of its people (China); 127.177 Proceed with implementing development projects, particularly those related to clean drinking water and health care (Algeria); 127.178 Continue its efforts to expand the coverage of and access to basic health services (India); 127.179 Continue further efforts to improve the educational and health systems in the country (Oman); 127.180 Step up processes that would raise the level of health care to all Iraqis (Nigeria); 127.181 Continue with its efforts to ensure that children have access to education and health care especially in rural areas (Bhutan); 127.182 Continue to enhance the education system and to support literacy programmes in Iraq (United Arab Emirates); 127.183 Intensify its efforts in the field of literacy programme (Iran (Islamic Republic of));  127.184 Continue to support literacy programme for the eradication of illiteracy (Pakistan); 127.185 Continue with its literacy programmes (Egypt); 127.186 Take more effective measures in order to eradicate illiteracy and to address the obstacles preventing access to education (Azerbaijan); 127.187 Strengthen efforts to enable girls from rural areas to enroll in schools and other educational institutions (Maldives); 127.188 Redouble efforts towards providing education for Women and the Girl Child (Nigeria); 127.189 Continue its efforts to ensure access to education for all at all levels and continue to work in reducing disparities between girls and boys in order to ensure the enrolment of girls in the same proportion equal to boys (State of Palestine); 127.190 Pursue its education programmes with a human rights approach (Nicaragua); 127.191 Take necessary measures to integrate human rights programmes in the curricula (Pakistan);  127.192 Continue to disseminate the culture of human rights and education (United Arab Emirates); 127.193 Continue to disseminate the culture of human rights and education (Lebanon); 127.194 Continue to work on the dissemination of the culture of human rights (Jordan); 127.195 Increase efforts to promote human rights culture in society (Uzbekistan); 127.196 Urgently adopt all the necessary measures to foster inclusive dialogue and provide minorities with adequate protection (Italy); 127.197 Intensify measures to strengthen inter-confessional and inter-ethnic harmony in the country (Uzbekistan); 127.198 Adopt additional measures aiming at protecting the minorities and continue cooperating with the international community with a view to stop the increasing violence (Argentina); 127.199 Take measures in order to create conditions for an inclusive political environment that includes respect for religious and ethnic minorities (Norway); 127.200 Fully implement the commitment in contributing to unifying all ethnicities and representatives of all religions (Russian Federation); 127.201 Ensure due protection of rights of its diverse religious, national or ethnic and linguistic minority groups threatened by the increased violence and tensions and to prevent their discrimination (Czech Republic); 127.202 Strengthen the protection of ethnic and religious minorities and ensure that all abuses against them are duly investigated and the perpetrators are brought to justice also in the context of the current crisis (Slovakia); 127.203 Endeavour to protect the security and rights of persons belonging to minorities, to bring to justice individuals and organizations that violate their rights and to ensure fair and proportional representation of all minorities in security apparatuses, governance and decision-making bodies at regional and federal levels (Ireland); 127.204 Take further legislative and practical steps to ensure equal political, economic, cultural and social rights for those belonging to minorities, including by increasing the number of reserved seats for minorities in the parliament (Hungary); 127.205 Take the necessary measures to ensure an improved representation of the members of minority groups not only among political ranks but in all social, cultural and economic fields (Turkey); 127.206 Apply measures aimed at guaranteeing the full respect of all refugees’ human rights and humanitarian law (Chile); 127.207 Cooperate with the international community to sufficiently improve the human rights situation of IDPs (Japan); 127.208 Take immediate measures towards the protection and re-settlement of IDPs (Austria); 127.209 Develop a national plan to provide protection and ensure the rights of all displaced persons in accordance with the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement (Norway); 127.210 Guarantee the protection and humanitarian assistance to displaced persons due to the internal conflict, in particular women and children, within the framework of international human rights and humanitarian law (Uruguay); 127.211 Adopt additional measures aimed at developing a global strategy to address all needs and to provide lasting solutions to internally displaced persons (Argentina); 127.212 Ensure adequate protection and humanitarian assistance to refugees and IDPS (Slovakia); 127.213 Draw up a plan to assist and protect IDPs in an effective and systematic manner (Republic of Korea); 127.214 Adopt a binding legal framework for the protection of internally displaced persons in accordance with international standards and the National Policy on Displacement (Serbia);  127.215 Allocate substantial funds for addressing the situation of the internally displaced persons and refugees to internal organizations and NGOs (Sweden);  127.216 Continue strengthening compensation and reintegration of victims of terrorism, which has led to migration and internal displacement (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of));  127.217 Effectively implement the national development plan for 2013–2017 (Sudan); 127.218 Further strengthen efforts in the area of development especially, concerning the enrolment at all levels of education, the realization of the right to food (Viet Nam); 127.219 Take further measures to protect the environment and human health in the context of ensuring effective ways of sustainable development (Turkmenistan); 127.220 Review the Anti-terrorism Law Number 13, ensuring its compliance with international human rights law (Latvia); 127.221 Take measures to amend the 2005 counter-terrorism law with the aim of reducing the risk of misapplication of the law (Norway); 127.222 Reform judicial practices under its anti-terrorism law, so that the law cannot be used as a pretext for arrests without warrants and lengthy detentions without trial, in violation of due process rights (United States of America); 127.223 Ensure that all counter-terrorism measures are in strict conformity with international law (Austria); 127.224 Investigate all violations of humanitarian law by terrorists groups (Chile); 127.225 Continue combating terrorism resolutely to ensure the Iraqi people to enjoy the rights in safety (China); 127.226 Continue its fight against evil terrorism including with international support and within international standards (Russian Federation); 127.227 Continue to confront the scourge of terrorism (Kuwait); 127.228 Intensify the fight against terrorism and extremism in cooperation with other countries (Tajikistan); 127.229 Continue its fight against terrorism (Bangladesh). 128. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English only]   Composition of the delegation The delegation of Iraq was headed by Dr. Abdulkareem Abdulah Shallal Al-Janabi, Deputy Minister of Human Rights and composed of the following members: • Mohammad Sabir Ismail, Permanent Representative; • Abdulkarim M. Shwakih, Minister Plenipotentiary; • Faten Mohsin Hadi Hadi, General Inspector Office; • Sawsan Shyaa Ghbayshi Al-Barrak , Director General Assistant; • Dr. Saman Sorani, Kurdistan Regional Government; • Dindar Firzenda Zebari, Kurdistan Regional Government; • Haidar Hussein Mahdi Al Ukaili, Legal Department; • Nuha Khudhur Yousif Sharmaa, Director General of the Ministry of Planning; • Nabeel Talaat Naser Al-Khawri, Director General of Christian affairs in the Council of Ministers; • Maytham Shakir Abdulkadhim Al-Shabbani, Director General of the Ministry of Labor; • Ghazi Mutlag Sekhi Sekhi, Director General of the Ministry of Education; • Moath Nori Abdulhameed Al-Mulahwais, Legal Department; • Monther Rasheed Sultan Sultan, Ministry of the Interior; • Sattar Nawrooz Khan Khan, Ministry of Displacement and Migration; • Nidhal Ali Ahmed Atemsh, Supreme Judicial Council; • Ahmed Abdulkareem Ahmed Al-Maeeni, State Consultative Council; • Khaleel Ibrahim Kadhim Al-Hamdani, National centre for human rights; • Akraam Ogla Dawood Al-Migde, Ministry of human rights; • Kasim Abdula Jasim Jasim Legal Advisor; • Mohammed Zamel Saeed Saeed, Legal consultant for the General Secretariat of the Council of Ministers; • Obaid Abdullah Hawas Hawas, Dept. of performance monitoring and protection of rights; • Ahmed Jamal Mohammed Mohammed, Translator; • Basim Mohammed Khalaf Albu-Shihab, Translator; • Nawrooz Abdullahsamad Abdulsamad, Kurdistan Regional Government; • Riyadh Sedeeq Fryad Qarawlus, Kurdistan Regional Government; • Omar Awadh Al-Adhami, The Permanent Mission of Iraq; • Haider Mahmood Mohsin Mohsin, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Uday Adnan Ibrahim Ibrahim, Ministry of Foreign Affairs.     