Distr.: General 26 March 2014 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-sixth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.14-12578 *1412578* 
Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–101 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–23 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 24–100 6 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 101–102 15  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 24 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review (UPR), established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its eighteenth session from 27 January to 7 February 2014. The review of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia was held at the 8th meeting on 30 January 2014. The delegation of the State under review was headed by Igor Djundev, Director of the Directorate for Multilateral Affairs at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. At its 14th meeting, held on 4 February 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia: China, Ireland and Namibia. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation given in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/MKD/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/MKD/2 and Corr.1); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/MKD/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, the Czech Republic, Germany, Mexico, the Netherlands, Slovenia, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR). I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The head of the delegation commenced by emphasizing that the State under review strongly believed in the pivotal role of the multilateral human rights system in monitoring the performance of States in implementing their international obligations. The Government had accepted and implemented the recommendations received during the first UPR cycle and in March 2012 had submitted, on a voluntary basis, a mid-term report on implementation which was the result of consultations with ministries and with the non.governmental sector. 6. In April 2012 the Government had established the Intersectoral Commission for Human Rights, composed of representatives of the Government and independent human rights institutions. It was tasked with the coordination of national human rights policy, follow-up to the recommendations of the treaty bodies and the streamlining of national efforts in that regard. On a number of occasions it had reviewed the implementation of the recommendations received during the first UPR cycle. 7. Responding to questions submitted concerning the justice system, the delegation stated that reform was a government priority. To that end, the Law on Criminal Procedure had been amended in 2010 and the amendments implemented in December 2013. Amendments to the Civil Procedure Code had been implemented in 2011. Since January 2013, following the implementation of the amendments to the Law on Courts, all newly appointed first instance judges had been required to be graduates of the initial training delivered by the academy for judges and prosecutors. New information technology software had assisted monitoring of the length of court proceedings since June 2013. Forthcoming activities would be concentrated on the implementation of the framework for further development of the judiciary, which had been adopted in September 2013, and the delegation enumerated the priority areas within the framework. 8. The delegation referred to the range of remedies available for the review of judicial decisions as well as the possibility of accessing the European Court of Human Rights and the individual complaints procedures of the treaty bodies. 9. Turning to non-discrimination, the delegation highlighted the adoption in 2010 of the Law on the Prevention of and Protection against Discrimination (LAPD), which prohibited direct and indirect discrimination and included a non-exhaustive list of grounds for discrimination. The Commission for Protection against Discrimination (CPAD) had been established under that law in 2011. The mandate of the Ombudsman had been strengthened in 2009 with the establishment of departments for the protection of children’s rights and the rights of persons with disabilities, and the protection of citizens against discrimination, torture and ill-treatment, and for equitable representation. The 2012-2015 National Strategy on Equality and Non-Discrimination on Grounds of Ethnicity Affiliation, Age, Mental and Physical Disability and Gender had been adopted, as had the 2013 Operational Plan for its implementation. 10. The new Law on Equal Opportunities, adopted in January 2012, explicitly prohibited all forms of discrimination against women in all spheres of society. The 2013.2020 Strategy and the 2013-2016 National Action Plan on Gender Equality had been adopted in line with that Law. Furthermore, the 2012-2015 Strategy on Gender Responsive Budgeting had been adopted, under which State administration bodies were obliged to mainstream the principle of equal opportunity. Every ministry had coordinators to oversee the implementation of the Equality Strategy.  11. The Government had adopted the 2012-2015 National Strategy for the Prevention of and Protection against Domestic Violence and the delegation mentioned that the Law on Social Protection had introduced new forms of non-institutional protection, such as centres for victims of domestic violence, which provide a range of services to victims. 12. Regarding freedom of expression, the delegation confirmed that the Government had developed the Law on Civil Liability for Defamation and Insult in cooperation with the Association of Journalists and with international expertise. With its adoption in 2012, acts of defamation and insult had been removed from the Criminal Code. In 2013, the parliament had adopted the Law on Media and the Law on Audio and Audiovisual Media Services following a wide consultation process with all stakeholders. Continued dialogue with journalists had resulted in a number of amendments to the laws being passed in January 2014. The new amendments specifically promoted and encouraged freedom of expression and ensured that restrictions on media content complied with the case law of the European Court of Human Rights. In December 2013 the Council for media ethics had been established as the self-regulatory media body. The Government was committed to the continuation of the dialogue with the media representatives in order to address the remaining issues, including government campaigns, the strengthening of the role of the public broadcaster and improving the standards of journalism. The Broadcasting Council had improved its enforcement record regarding the illegal concentration of ownership and conflicts of interest.  13. The delegation stated that the Government was continuing to implement reforms in the penitentiary system in line with the recommendations of the Committee against Torture and the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture. With a view to alleviating overcrowding in prison facilities, a strategy on the establishment of a probation service had been adopted. Guidelines on the supervision of prisons had been developed to improve the quality of the supervisory process in prisons and had been applied since 2012.  14. The Government had mandated specialized human rights training for police officers and the delegation noted that, in addition to complying with the Law on Police, under the Code of Police Ethics, police officers were obliged to act in line with the specific needs of certain categories of vulnerable persons. The external control of police work was performed by the parliament and the Ombudsman. Action had been taken to enhance the capacities of the Sector for Internal Control and Professional Standards, including the normative framework and training. The Sector conducted unannounced visits to police stations and inspected the detention facilities and the records of detainees. The Sector also conducted inspections with the Ombudsman and the non-governmental organization (NGO) “All for Fair Trials”. 15. With regard to questions concerning the rights of minorities, the delegation stated that the Government was committed to fostering good inter-ethnic relations and implementation of the Ohrid Framework Agreement. In July 2012, a comprehensive report on the status of implementation of all policies deriving from the Ohrid Framework Agreement had been published and follow-up was in process. 16. In respect of questions concerning the Roma, the delegation stated that major efforts had been made to remedy the situation. Government policy centred on the National Strategy for Roma and the 2005-2015 Decade of Roma Inclusion. Municipalities with significant Roma populations had prepared local action plans. The inclusion of Roma children in pre-school education continued to progress. The delegation provided various statistics on education and employment indicating progress in the social inclusion of the Roma. Given the particular vulnerability of Roma women, in 2010 the Government had adopted the second National Action Plan for advancement of the social status of Roma Women, covering the period from 2011 to 2013.  17. Regarding children’s rights, the delegation referred to the Government’s adoption of a revised 2012-2015 National Action Plan on Children’s Rights. That plan had been prepared in cooperation with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and it recognized the progress achieved in the health-care and education sectors in particular. A new Law on Child Protection had been adopted in February 2013 which prohibited a wide range of violations of the rights of the child. Sanctions for non-implementation of the provisions of the Law had been made stricter and fines had been introduced. The Centres for Social Work, with specialized staff, provided protection and support to the children involved whenever cases of sexual abuse of children or paedophilia were reported. Furthermore, the Government was working on the identification of specialized foster families for child victims of sexual abuse and paedophilia. In 2008, the crime of trafficking in children had been introduced into the Criminal Code and child pornography had been criminalized. In 2009, the sanctions for computer-based child pornography had been increased.  18. With reference to a question on unaccompanied minors, the delegation pointed out that the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection prescribed that asylum applications by children should be signed by a legal representative and that unaccompanied minors should be assigned a guardian as soon as possible, in accordance with the Family Law, and should also be offered legal counselling. All necessary measures were undertaken to find the family members of unaccompanied minors and the principle of the best interests of the child was taken into consideration when an asylum application was processed.  19. The delegation stated that the Law on Juvenile Justice had been implemented in 2009 and projects for the advancement of the legal framework had been undertaken and standards for the application of the law drawn up. The State Council for Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency had started operating in 2009 and had adopted a national strategy for the prevention of juvenile delinquency.  20. Referring to the rights of persons with disabilities, the delegation noted that, inter alia, the Government had undertaken a number of activities to ensure better living conditions for persons with disabilities relating to deinstitutionalization, the provision of day centres for persons with mental disability and other matters. The Government planned to further its existing strong partnership with NGOs by funding reliable organizations to provide services locally, while ensuring oversight.  21. In relation to the implementation of the recommendations of the 2011 Election Observation Mission of the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, the delegation noted that the ruling and opposition parties had reached an agreement on the necessary amendments to the Electoral Code and they had been adopted by the parliament in January 2014.  22. The delegation noted that the Government had submitted all outstanding reports to the treaty bodies, except for one on the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, which would be submitted shortly. 23. The head of the delegation ended his introductory remarks by confirming the commitment of the State under review to cooperation and to continuing the reforms. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 24. During the interactive dialogue, 56 delegations made statements. The recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 25. Thailand commended non-discrimination and minority rights legislation. Continued efforts to promote judicial independence were encouraged. Despite the National Strategy on Equalization of Rights of Persons with Disabilities, challenges remained. While noting the Government’s efforts to promote the right to health, Thailand expressed concern at the policy shift from preventive health care and access to medical services. It made recommendations. 26. Togo commended the strengthening of the Ombudsman’s mandate through the creation of various services for the better protection of citizens. It commended the establishment of CPAD, the mandate of which had been defined in LPAD. It made recommendations.  27. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland welcomed the election of the country to the Human Rights Council. The Ohrid Framework Agreement would improve inter-ethnic relations, but the Framework review was incomplete and improvements had been delayed. The polarization and opaque funding of the media were a matter of concern. It made recommendations. 28. The United States of America commended the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) and improved prison conditions. It expressed concern about the mistreatment of detainees, detention conditions, the use of public resources for political party activities, interference in the judiciary and the media, the prosecution of political opponents, police impunity and government corruption. It enquired about measures to increase oversight of government officials in order to address those issues. It also expressed concern about ongoing child labour. It made recommendations. 29. On this and some other occasions during the meeting, including in response to a point of order raised by the State under review, the President reminded delegates of the need to adhere to official United Nations terminology when referring to the State under review. 30. In its point of order, the State under review reminded delegates that Security Council resolution 817 (1993) mentioned only a provisional designation and not the name of the country. It also mentioned a judgment of the International Court of Justice which in paragraph 93 referred to the issue of the name of the country and how third countries could address it. 31. Uruguay welcomed the ratification of CRPD and of its Optional Protocol (OP.CRPD) and the signing of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (OP-ICESCR), collaboration with special procedures of the Human Rights Council, judicial reform, the Ombudsman’s efforts in the field of torture, and the Law, Strategy and Action Plan on gender equality. Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) persons were vulnerable, hiding their identities and avoiding the use of health-care services. It made recommendations. 32. Viet Nam commended recent developments in human rights promotion and protection and welcomed the commitment of the State under review to international human rights cooperation and dialogue. It made recommendations. 33. Albania commended the judicial reform, particularly in relation to the independence and quality of judges. It commended progress on gender equality and enquired about the results of the recently enacted law. It welcomed the adoption of the Strategy on Integrated Education and implementation of the Ohrid Framework Agreement, but expressed concern about the use of the Albanian language, segregated education, learning conditions and textbook review. It made recommendations. 34. Algeria welcomed the adoption of measures at the institutional, legislative and normative levels for the protection of human rights, including the establishment of CPAD, the ratification of CRPD, cooperation with special procedures, improved reporting to the treaty bodies and the submission of a mid-term report on the implementation of the recommendations of the first UPR cycle. It made recommendations. 35. Argentina noted the National Strategy for the Fight against Poverty and Social Exclusion 2010-2020, the 2010-2020 Strategy on Elderly Persons, LAPD and the creation of CPAD. It encouraged normative reforms and the allocation of resources for the strengthening of the institutional framework. It made recommendations. 36. Armenia highlighted the ratification of CRPD and OP-CRPD and the signing of OP.ICESCR. It acknowledged the policies and programmes to protect the rights of the Roma community and welcomed the promotion of gender equality and non-discrimination through the adoption of national strategies. It made recommendations. 37. Australia acknowledged efforts to address discrimination through new legislation. However, the legislation did not address sexual orientation or gender identity. It noted reports of discrimination against Roma and limitations on media freedom. Efforts to improve the penitentiary system were ongoing, but reports of poor conditions persisted. It made recommendations. 38. Austria noted with concern that freedom of expression and of the press had deteriorated. Allegations of politically motivated detention of politicians and journalists had undermined trust in the impartiality of law enforcement agencies and the independence of the judiciary. Attacks against the LGBTI community underscored the need for legal protection for it against discrimination. Unemployment and other concerns of the Roma population should be addressed. It made recommendations. 39. Belarus noted the strengthening of the legal and institutional framework, including judicial reform and independence; the National Action Plan on Children’s Rights; the National Coordination Body for Protection of Children against Abuse and Neglect; and the Law on Child Protection. It welcomed efforts to improve inter-ethnic relations, implementation of the Ohrid Framework Agreement, and the social inclusion of Roma. It commended amendments to the Criminal Code establishing punishments for trafficking in persons. It made recommendations. 40. Belgium commended progress since the first UPR cycle, including the ratification of various human rights instruments and the decriminalization of defamation. However, significant challenges remained. It welcomed advances in legislation relating to freedom of expression, but expressed concern regarding freedom of the press. It made recommendations. 41. Bosnia and Herzegovina praised the submission of a mid-term report on the UPR process. It commended the ratification of CRPD and its Optional Protocol, the signing of OP-ICESCR and cooperation with the treaty bodies. It noted the adoption of national strategies on human rights issues and enquired about the mandate of the Intersectoral Commission for Human Rights and possible challenges it faced.  42. Brazil welcomed ratification of CRPD and encouraged ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CPED). It stressed the importance of strengthening the institution of the Ombudsman and promoting its independence. It also noted the prioritization of non-discrimination against the Roma. Welcoming amendments to the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection, it suggested that procedures for asylum-seekers should be improved. It noted progress in gender equality, but expressed concern about intolerance towards lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) persons. It made recommendations. 43. Bulgaria commended the adoption of human rights legislation, increased reporting to human rights treaty bodies and the establishment of the Intersectoral Commission for Human Rights. Given the importance of freedom of expression and independent media, draft media legislation should comply with international standards and it expressed its desire to follow up that issue. It made recommendations. 44. Cambodia welcomed the adoption of new laws and national strategies, for instance on discrimination, gender equality, trafficking and illegal migration. It welcomed the ratification of CRPD and the signing of OP-ICESCR and appreciated the fact that consideration was being given to ratification of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW). It made recommendations. 45. Canada asked for information on the implementation of the Law on the Prevention of and Protection against Discrimination. It noted the adoption of legislative measures, national strategies and action plans to promote human rights. Ethnic discrimination was a matter of concern, and the rights of all minorities should be protected. It made recommendations. 46. China noted the ratification of CRPD, the Law and National Strategy on Prevention of and Protection against Discrimination, the Law on Equal Opportunities for Women and Men, the National Action Plan on Gender Equality, the Law on Child Protection and the National Action Plan on Children’s Rights. Noting the measures to protect minority rights, it asked what steps would be taken to enhance protection of the rights of Roma, especially women, children and young people. It made a recommendation. 47. The Congo welcomed reforms aimed at enhancing the independence, effectiveness and transparency of the judicial system. LPAD had facilitated human rights training and awareness-raising campaigns. The National Strategy and Action Plan on Roma had led to progress for them in education, housing, health and employment. It made recommendations. 48. Côte d’Ivoire commended the ratification of international instruments, cooperation with the United Nations human rights mechanisms, the strengthening of the judicial and penitentiary systems and efforts by the Commission for Protection against Discrimination. It took note of policies on human trafficking, freedom of expression, and promotion of tolerance and religious diversity. It made recommendations. 49. Croatia commended actions taken to implement recommendations from the first UPR cycle. It enquired about concrete measures taken to strengthen judicial independence and efficiency and about the impact of new legislation on the backlog of cases. Commending the prioritization of inter-ethnic relations and protection against discrimination, it enquired about concrete measures taken to guarantee the ethnic, cultural, linguistic and religious identities of all communities.  50. The delegation of the State under review pointed out that the International Coordinating Committee for National Human Rights Institutions had awarded “B” status to the Ombudsman in 2011 and had made recommendations that would assist it in achieving an upgrade to “A” status. Those recommendations mainly related to expanding its mandate to encompass promotional activities and improving the procedure for the election of the Ombudsman’s deputies. Draft amendments to the legislation on the Ombudsman had been prepared and would be sent to the Government by April 2014.  51. The Intersectoral Commission for Human Rights included independent institutions such as the Ombudsman and the Commission for Protection against Discrimination as well as ministries. It dealt comprehensively with human rights and with the recommendations of international bodies, such as those of the treaty bodies and UPR. 52. The delegation referred to the attention being given to addressing the problems of the Roma community and provided further details of relevant activities. Education was a priority and the inclusion of Roma children in pre-school education was considered to be particularly important. Each year around 450 children had been enrolled in pre-school education free of charge and it was also considered important that they were not segregated but attended together with the other children. The number of first grade Roma pupils increased by 8 per cent between 2005 and 2013. Another programme provided financial incentives for Roma parents to keep their children in secondary school. Roma information centres had been established in 12 municipalities with large Roma populations. Sixteen Roma health mediators had been employed in 8 municipalities. Recent results included assistance in the form of counselling on healthy lifestyles, access to health insurance and the identification of children who had not been immunized. The relevant ministries had coordinated to create groups which reached out to Roma communities to identify persons whose birth had not been registered and assist them in obtaining documentation. 53. The delegation stated that, following the adoption of LAPD, the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy had prepared the National Strategy on Equality and Non-Discrimination (2012-2015). It was being implemented through projects such as the training of some 600 State officials and civil society partners in identifying and combating discrimination; that training would be completed in April 2014. The delegation stated that the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy had prepared the National Strategy on Equality and Non.discrimination, 2012-2015. Implementation activities included strengthening the capacities of the Ministry and relevant partners, in which up to 600 Government officials and civil society partners had been trained to identify and combat discrimination. An intersectoral group had also been established under the Law on Equal Opportunities for Women and Men to promote the inclusion of gender aspects and gender policies at the central and local levels. 54. Referring to children with special educational needs, the delegation highlighted the right of such pupils to individual assistance. In the 2012-13 academic year pupils with disabilities were accommodated in the regular classes of mainstream secondary schools and in the special needs classes in primary education. 55. Referring to the integration of education across ethnic communities, the delegation highlighted the strategy for integrated education with five thematic areas. A number of measures had already been undertaken towards its implementation. 56. The Czech Republic noted that the importance attached by the State under review to human rights was reflected in its election to the Human Rights Council. The Czech Republic considered that reports indicating a deterioration in the situation of freedom of expression and freedom of the press since the previous cycle of the UPR were regrettable. It made recommendations. 57. Estonia noted the signing of OP-ICESCR and the ratification of CRPD and OP.CRPD. It welcomed the ongoing implementation of the Ohrid Framework Agreement. The rule of law should be strengthened through the implementation of legal and policy frameworks and action to combat corruption. Judicial transparency, independence and impartiality should be addressed. It expressed concern about the deterioration in press freedom but welcomed the decriminalization of defamation. It made recommendations. 58. France welcomed the signing of OP-ICESCR. It welcomed progress towards social cohesion, particularly with respect to the Roma community. It made recommendations. 59. Germany noted improvements in public administration and the judiciary. Expressing concern about deteriorating conditions for human rights defenders, it enquired about steps taken to reduce media defamation of NGOs. It called for the implementation of policies and programmes for the inclusion of Roma and persons with disabilities and for cooperation with NGOs. It expressed concern about deteriorating press freedom. It made recommendations. 60. Greece expressed concern about the excessive prison sentence given to a journalist and deteriorating press freedom, the manner in which the draft laws on the media and on audio and audiovisual media services were being adopted, the lack of transparency of government advertising and self-censorship of the press. Significant reforms were required to safeguard media independence. It made a recommendation. 61. Hungary requested information on the implementation of LAPD. It welcomed efforts to strengthen the mandate of the Ombudsman and amendments to the Law on Asylum but shared the concerns of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees about the vulnerable situation of children. It made recommendations. 62. Indonesia noted the focus on judicial reform to ensure its independence and efficiency. Indonesia welcomed efforts to attain accreditation for the Ombudsman with the International Coordinating Committee for National Human Rights Institutions and urged that efforts be made to ensure compliance with the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles). It welcomed steps to prevent discrimination against all groups, including Roma, and to promote cultural diversity. It made recommendations. 63. Iraq welcomed the ratification of CRPD and the State’s cooperation with the special procedures. It commended measures taken to ensure judicial independence and the rights of children and persons with disabilities and to prevent discrimination and torture. It welcomed the National Action Plan on Gender Equality, efforts to increase women’s representation and the National Strategy for the Fight against Poverty and Social Exclusion. It made a recommendation. 64. Ireland noted the adoption of legislation on discrimination, albeit not explicitly protecting LGBT persons, the decriminalization of defamation and the visits by two special procedures mandate holders. It was concerned at continuing discrimination and the failure to ensure the Roma population’s right to the highest health standards. It made recommendations. 65. Italy appreciated the progress made by the State under review, including in children’s and property rights and in data protection, but was concerned about the closure of a number of independent media outlets since the previous UPR. It welcomed ratification of CRPD. It made recommendations. 66. Libya commended the State under review for ratifying the CRPD and its Optional Protocol, and adopting a national strategy dedicated to ensuring equal opportunities for women and men and a national action plan on gender equality. It highlighted achievements in the field of the rights of the child. It made a recommendation. 67. Liechtenstein acknowledged efforts to combat discrimination against women and children and strengthen their rights by adopting legislation on equal opportunities for women and men and on child protection, and subsequently implementing strategies and national action plans. It acknowledged the commitment of the State under review to international justice. It made recommendations. 68. Lithuania commended the ratification of CRPD and its Optional Protocol. It noted the adoption of legislation on the media and audiovisual media services and on equal opportunities for women and men, although it highlighted continued reports of discrimination against women in law and in practice. It made recommendations. 69. Malaysia acknowledged the progress made in women’s empowerment and children’s rights, particularly through the adoption of national action plans. It commended efforts to revise and adopt standard operating procedures, a strategy and an action plan for combating trafficking in persons and illegal migration, and efforts to provide training for law enforcement officials. It made a recommendation. 70. Mexico welcomed the Government’s cooperation with the human right mechanisms during visits to the country and through reports submitted to treaty bodies. It trusted that the UPR mechanism would assist the State under review to overcome its human rights challenges. It made recommendations. 71. Montenegro noted the adoption of anti-discrimination legislation and the establishment of a commission for that purpose. It requested information on the Commission’s achievements thus far. It welcomed the adoption of a strategy to combat domestic violence and the establishment of a dedicated coordination body. It requested information on achievements in combating trafficking in persons. 72. Morocco commended amendments to legislation strengthening the Ombudsman’s mandate to create departments to protect the rights of vulnerable groups. It requested more information on the mandate and operation of the Intersectoral Commission for Human Rights. It noted judicial reforms and amendments to the Law on Civil Procedure and the new Law on Criminal Procedure. It made a recommendation. 73. Namibia appreciated the level of cooperation by the State under review with regional and international human rights mechanisms, including by strengthening its Intersectoral Commission for Human Rights. Namibia further noted the establishment of frameworks to promote and mainstream gender equality, including a new law, strategy and action plan. It made recommendations. 74. The delegation of the State under review stated that judicial reform was being continuously undertaken, with measures aimed at strengthening the independence, impartiality and professionalism of the judiciary. Legal amendments had introduced new conditions for the election of judges, for disciplinary procedures and for career advancement using objective and measurable criteria. Transparency had also been increased by requiring courts to appoint public relations officers. 75. The delegation mentioned that the general aim of the new Law on Criminal Procedure was to establish a functional justice system based upon European standards, guaranteeing human rights within a simple and economical procedure with a focus on the nature and seriousness of the offence, the status of the defendants and victims and the need to protect society. In relation to pretrial detention, the new law required that special care be taken to balance the severity of the crime, the sentence which could be expected and the duration of and necessity for detention. The delegation provided more details of the provisions regulating court decisions on pretrial detention and also highlighted a recent public hearing in the parliament on the issue. The Directorate for Execution of Sanctions was committed to improving the material conditions in prisons. The delegation underlined the significance of the 2009 European Union Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance project implemented in cooperation with the Council of Europe, “Capacity building of the law enforcement agencies for appropriate treatment of detained and sentenced persons”, and said that a national strategy on the development of the penitentiary system would be developed. Attention was also being given to a sustainable training system for prison staff. 76. In relation to questions on the ratification of the Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, the delegation mentioned that the criminal act of aggression had already been incorporated into amendments to the Criminal Code which were currently in the parliamentary procedure. 77. The delegation pointed out that it was difficult to set a time frame for the implementation of the Ohrid Framework Agreement because it was a continuous process and the prime objective had been met. Implementation remained a Government priority. The Government continued to implement employment programmes for members of ethnic communities which were not in the majority. It also mentioned activities such as the training of interpreters in the Albanian language for the public administration. With regard to the institutional framework, the delegation mentioned the Secretariat for the Implementation of the Framework Agreement and the Agency for the Realization of the Rights of the Communities.  78. The delegation stated that the Ministry of the Interior reacted to every reported occurrence of hate speech. The Unit for Cyber Crime monitored announcements of meetings and other forms of dissemination of hate speech and maintained contact with the administrators of web portals. Internet service providers were responsible for the published content of their online services.  79. The delegation also stated that the Sector for Internal Control and Professional Standards investigated and acted upon all reports of excessive use of force by the police. The Ministry of the Interior had undertaken capacity-building to build a positive approach on the part of the police towards all citizens, regardless of their sex, race, colour, national and social origin, political and religious beliefs, property and social status. Projects had been undertaken to build trust with the Roma community. 80. The Netherlands encouraged the Government of the State under review to step up its efforts to further enhance civil and political rights for all, regardless of sexual orientation and gender identity, to further strengthen judicial independence and to ensure freedom of the media. It made recommendations. 81. Nigeria noted the efforts to align domestic legislation with international human rights instruments and urged that work to promote and protect human rights should be continued. Nigeria commended the submission of a mid-term report on the UPR process. It called on the State under review to ensure the protection of children’s rights and invited it to take steps to ensure press freedom in line with international best practices. It made recommendations. 82. The Philippines commended the continued efforts of the State under review to harmonize its national and institutional frameworks with international human rights instruments. It recognized its achievements in introducing reforms to strengthen judicial independence and its progress in combating discrimination and gender inequality. It made recommendations. 83. Poland acknowledged the constructive cooperation by the State under review with international human rights institutions, especially treaty bodies established under United Nations and Council of Europe conventions. It was concerned about the increased marginalization of Roma women and children, all the forms of discrimination they faced and their difficulty in accessing health care and social systems. It made recommendations. 84. Portugal welcomed the progress by the State under review towards attaining “A” status accreditation for the Ombudsman in accordance with the Paris Principles. It welcomed the adoption of anti-discrimination legislation and the establishment of a dedicated commission. It commended it for the adoption of the Strategy for Integrated Education. It made recommendations. 85. The Republic of Moldova commended the judicial reforms and encouraged the efforts to strengthen judicial independence. It welcomed the strategies developed on children’s rights, domestic violence, human trafficking and gender equality and called for their adequate resourcing and full implementation. It regretted the reported rise in child sexual abuse and exploitation and requested further data on victims of such offences and action taken. It made recommendations. 86. Romania considered that recent visits of special rapporteurs showed the Government’s commitment to cooperating with international human rights mechanisms. It appreciated the measures to protect the rights of minority groups. Support for smaller community projects could stimulate mother tongue usage in the mass media and religious services. It made a recommendation. 87. The Russian Federation commended the progress of the State under review in improving human rights mechanisms and protecting the civil and political rights of ethnic minorities. It made recommendations.  88. Senegal congratulated the State under review for its commitment to promoting and protecting human rights, as evidenced in the country’s recent accession to several international instruments, including CRPD and its Optional Protocol. Senegal welcomed the measures to combat discrimination against women, children and persons with disabilities. It made recommendations. 89. Serbia commended the prioritization of judicial independence and legislative reforms, particularly the adoption of the Law on Criminal Procedure. It commended the level of inter-community tolerance, government respect for minority community rights and measures ensuring the functioning of media services for minority groups. It welcomed the adoption of anti-discrimination legislation and the establishment of a dedicated independent body in that regard. It emphasized the importance of cooperation between the Government and independent human rights institutions with NGOs and media professionals to promote inter-community tolerance. 90. Slovakia commended measures for judicial reform, but called for stronger action to ensure judicial independence. It asked what additional measures were envisaged to expedite legal proceedings and reduce the number of pending cases. It noted that the prison system remained underfunded and understaffed. Prison overcrowding, conditions for juveniles and the complaints system remained a concern. It made recommendations. 91. Slovenia welcomed the adoption of legislation prohibiting direct and indirect discrimination, but noted that discrimination on grounds of ethnicity and sexual orientation persisted. It noted concerns over reported hostilities motivated by sexual orientation. It was concerned at discrepancies in education levels between boys and girls and at reports of undocumented children. It made recommendations. 92. Spain commended efforts to improve the enjoyment of the right to freedom of expression, but recognized that shortcomings in that area remained. It noted that measures had been adopted to improve the situation of the Roma people, but that they rarely participated in decision-making on issues likely to affect them. It made recommendations. 93. Sweden commended efforts to undertake judicial reforms in line with international standards, but noted an increase in claims of selective justice. It noted reports of poor media freedom, a lack of consultation of civil society on new draft media laws, funding for public advertising for political purposes and self-censorship. It made recommendations. 94. Switzerland remained concerned about persistent discrimination against minority and other groups. The situation of women from minority ethnic groups, especially Roma, warranted special attention. It was concerned about freedom of expression, the extension of executive powers in legal matters, prison conditions and detainee mistreatment. It made recommendations. 95. Responding to questions about CPED, the delegation of the State under review pointed out the complexity of the legislation involved, but said that the Government was working on legislative amendments to allow ratification. 96. LAPD contained a non-exhaustive list of grounds for discrimination and CPAD acted upon applications concerning discrimination based upon sexual orientation. The delegation provided statistics relating to those cases. The Commission was also initiating a project with NGO partners to survey the situation of the LGBT population. 97. In relation to the mission of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, the delegation reported that the Government was awaiting the report and would continue to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur.  98. The delegation reaffirmed the Government’s commitment to continuing the dialogue with the media associations on the remaining issues of concern to them. That dialogue had recently resulted in the adoption of several amendments to the new media laws, including a provision that provided for the Association of Journalists and other members of civil society to have the majority of the seats in the new Council for Audio and Audiovisual Services.  99. The delegation pointed out that the Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare was implementing public housing projects under which 10 per cent of the housing would be allocated to members of the Roma community and that, under another project, 100 apartments had been built for Roma asylum seekers from the region. Roma were also assisted by programmes such as one for active employment and also through measures under the Ohrid Framework Agreement, which had resulted in the employment of 150 Roma officials in government ministries. Street children were assisted at day centres staffed by social workers. 100. In conclusion, the head of delegation emphasized that the delegation had taken note of the suggestions and recommendations made, that he regarded the interactive dialogue as being instrumental in the country’s efforts in relation to human rights protection and promotion. He thanked all those involved. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 101. The following recommendations will be examined by the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the 26th session of the Human Rights Council in June 2014. 101.1. Complete the process of ratification of relevant international instruments (Côte d’Ivoire); 101.2 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CPED) (France) (Iraq) (Poland) and proceed to recognize the competence of its Committee (Uruguay); Ratify without delay CPED and translate it into national legislation (Belgium); Continue the efforts initiated to ratify CPED, as well as the main international instruments on human rights to which the country is not yet a party (Argentina); 101.3 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Portugal); 101.4 Consider ratifying the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Spain); 101.5 Ratify the Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute (Estonia) (Liechtenstein), if possible with a view to contributing to the activation of the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court over the crime of aggression at the beginning of 2017 (Liechtenstein); 101.6 Stop all ill-treatment, particularly in prisons and improve detention conditions, respecting its obligations under the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and its Optional Protocol (Switzerland); 101.7 Establish a clear procedure for the implementation of and financial support for the national strategies and plans for the protection of human rights (Russian Federation); 101.8 Complete the review of the Ohrid Framework Agreement and implement its recommendations by mid-2014 (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 101.9 Further review and strengthen measures in place towards full implementation of the Ohrid Framework Agreement aiming at integration without assimilation, especially on issues of use of the Albanian language and in providing the necessary conditions for education in minority languages (Albania); 101.10 Keep up its efforts aimed at increasing the transparency in the appointment process of the Ombudsman and introduce the necessary legislative changes in order to reinforce the institutional capacities of the Office and bring its competences in line with the Paris Principles (Hungary); 101.11 Give full effect to the opinion submitted by the Ombudsman to the Government regarding the need to make additional amendments to the legislation to make the institution consistent with the Paris Principles (Togo); 101.12 Enhance the support for the Office of the Ombudsman and strengthen the Commission for Protection against Discrimination to ensure that both institutions fulfil their duties effectively and independently (Bulgaria); 101.13 Take measures to strengthen the Office of the Ombudsman, in order to fully adjust it to the Paris Principles, allocating it with adequate resources and more qualified personnel (Uruguay); Establish a national institution for the promotion and protection of human rights in conformity with the Paris Principles (Congo); Take the necessary measures to guarantee full conformity of the national human rights institution with the Paris Principles (Morocco); Accelerate finalization of the necessary amendments to the legislative measures to ensure the accreditation of the Ombudsman’s Office with an “A” status in line with Paris Principles (Namibia); Establish the Ombudsman as an autonomous body under public law and its full use for the protection of human rights (Portugal); 101.14 Endeavour to put in place structures that guarantee the citizenship rights of its people (Nigeria); 101.15 Run further public awareness campaigns on legal protection against discrimination (Cambodia); 101.16 Continue to implement the laws and policies prohibiting direct and indirect discrimination, on the rights of persons with disabilities, on equal opportunities for women and men on child protection as well as action plans to better protect the rights of women, children and persons with disabilities (China); 101.17 Pursue policies aimed at ensuring equal opportunities (Côte d’Ivoire); 101.18 Punish perpetrators of hate speech and incitement to discrimination in accordance with the law (Togo); 101.19 Give a strong response to hate speech, including in offline and online media and systematically denounce expressions of intolerance by opinion leaders (Bulgaria); 101.20 Prohibit all forms of discrimination and violence against women (Brazil); 101.21 Adopt further measures to ensure gender equality in the society, including through the accession to and effective implementation of relevant international and regional treaties (Viet Nam); Amend its laws on gender equality and explicitly prohibit all forms of discrimination against women by adopting appropriate national legislation (Congo); Further continue promoting gender equality in order to explicitly prohibit all forms of discrimination against women (Armenia); Consolidate its efforts towards gender equality1 (Namibia); 101.22 Continue to implement existing legislation related to gender equality in order to ensure that men and women are treated equally and stereotypes regarding women are eradicated (Lithuania); 101.23 Fully implement the recommendations of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women issued in 2013 regarding the situation of women, including temporary special measures to ensure non-discrimination of women belonging to minorities, and allocating adequate funding for the national action plans and strategies aimed at eliminating all forms of discrimination against women belonging to the Roma population (Spain); 101.24 Enhance dialogue with and assistance to vulnerable groups, in particular ethnic minorities (Viet Nam); 101.25 Allow free movement of Albanian and Roma minorities and resolve the problem of lack of identity documents, which constitutes an obstacle to the exercise of their rights (Congo); 101.26 Continue its efforts to ensure non-discrimination among all groups of the society, including Roma communities, including through public awareness-raising campaigns (Indonesia); 101.27 Launch a campaign for the birth registration of children and adults living on the streets and for those belonging to ethnic minorities to facilitate the obtaining of identification documents (Mexico); Strengthen efforts to ensure retroactive birth registrations and issuance of documents for children lacking such documentation as well as to ensure that children lacking identity documents are not refused access to health, education and other public services, including child allowances (Namibia); Ensure full birth registration, including by retroactive registration, and access to public services, including to education for children lacking documentation (Slovenia); 101.28 Analyse the results of the policy of inclusion of the Roma, assess the remaining challenges yet to be addressed, especially regarding the fate of women and girls, and attach measures to it as well as reserve the required budget (Belgium); Continue to work towards improving the living conditions of the Roma population in general and, in particular, of vulnerable children (Congo); Intensify their efforts to secure and effectively implement the existing policies designed for the integration of the Roma minority (Poland); 101.29 Strengthen policies and activities that support the Roma, to achieve the objectives of the Decade of Roma Inclusion (Algeria); 101.30 Take further concrete and effective steps towards social inclusion for Roma people (Australia); 101.31 Follow up on cases of discriminatory treatment of the Roma population in the area of employment and provide equal chances and treatment to Roma children with regard to education (Austria); 101.32 Take steps to address challenges faced by Roma women and girls in the areas of health care and employment (Canada); 101.33 Encourage the active participation of the Roma population in the decision-making regarding measures that affect them (Spain); 101.34 Develop prevention and penalization strategies to address incidents of racism against the Roma population that are detected, including the establishment of a National Observatory against Racism (Spain); 101.35 Ensure that no disadvantage shall result for citizens from the exercise of their right to identify themselves with any ethnic group (Bulgaria); 101.36 Immediately step up its efforts to eliminate all forms of discrimination based on ethnic origin, religion, gender and sexual orientation (Switzerland); 101.37 Intensify efforts to combat effectively the manifestations of hatred suffered by minorities (France); Endeavour to tackle issues of discrimination, particularly discrimination on grounds of ethnicity and linguistic traditions (Nigeria); Continue to improve the legislation framework in the fields of the protection of national and ethnic minorities from discrimination (Russian Federation); 101.38 Take concrete measures to strengthen the legislation to combat all forms of discrimination, including those related to sexual orientation, and step up new awareness campaigns to combat all forms of discrimination, including those based on gender, ethnic origin, sexual orientation or gender identity (Uruguay); 101.39 Strengthen actions to ensure the effective implementation of laws against discrimination, in particular discrimination based on sexual orientation (Argentina); 101.40 Fight impunity for violence against marginalized persons motivated by their ethnicity, religion, or sexual orientation, particularly through an improved awareness of public opinion, and the police and judicial authorities (Belgium); 101.41 Conduct public awareness campaigns to promote tolerance and the principles of equality and non-discrimination including on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity (Brazil); 101.42 Implement fully and without delay the 2010 anti-discrimination law, by integrating provisions covering discrimination based on sexual orientation (Belgium); Ensure that discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity are specifically included in the Anti-Discrimination Act and related programmes (France); Align the national anti-discrimination legislation with the European Union standards, in particular in relation to the rights of LGBTI persons (Italy); Explicitly prohibit discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation, which is not included in the Law on the Prevention of and Protection against Discrimination (Slovenia); 101.43 Introduce legislation that explicitly protects LGBT persons from discrimination (Ireland); 101.44 Include a specific prohibition of discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity in line with international standards in the anti.discrimination legislation and take appropriate measures to end impunity for violence and intimidation of the LGBT community (Netherlands); Adopt measures to prevent incidents of violence on the grounds of sexual orientation (Canada); 101.45 Amend anti-discrimination legislation to include sexual orientation and gender identity as specific grounds for discrimination and to open prompt, impartial and effective investigations into attacks on LGBTI individuals or organisations (Austria); 101.46 Strengthen anti-discrimination legislation to prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity, and take effective measures to combat violence and discrimination against LGBTI people (Australia); 101.47 Launch a campaign to disarm the civilian population that supports the reduction of death rates related to gun violence (Mexico); 101.48 Develop a professional management approach within prisons as recommended by the Council of Europe’s Committee for the Prevention of Torture (United States of America); 101.49 Continue efforts to ameliorate prison conditions, including steps to address overcrowding and violence, as well as improving access to health care, education and recreational activities (Australia); 101.50 Take effective measures to bring conditions of detention in line with international standards, notably with regard to the overcrowding of prisons (Germany); 101.51 Continue reforms of the penitentiary system with special focus on human rights training for penitentiary staff (Slovakia); 101.52 Adopt measures to raise awareness to prevent incidents of child, early and forced marriage and take steps to investigate and prosecute any cases thereof (Canada); 101.53 Strengthen existing criminal and family laws or adopt a comprehensive law that addresses all forms of violence against women, including domestic and sexual violence, ensuring that all women and girl victims of acts of violence are protected by these laws and have access to immediate means of protection as well as to reparation, and that perpetrators are prosecuted (Uruguay); 101.54 Strengthen policies aimed at the protection of children and the prevention of domestic violence (Côte d’Ivoire); Intensify its efforts to combat domestic violence and its efforts to ensure that victims of domestic violence have access to adequate assistance, including legal and psychological counselling, medical help and shelter (Liechtenstein); 101.55 Step up measures to safeguard the rights of the child, including by preventing discrimination against children of disadvantaged or vulnerable groups, and by stronger implementation of child labour laws and the revised 2012-2015 National Action Plan on Children’s Rights (Philippines); 101.56 Implement legislation prohibiting corporal punishment of children in the home and conduct awareness-raising campaigns on the harmful effect of corporal punishment and on the use of alternative and non-violent forms of discipline in a manner consistent with the child’s dignity (Liechtenstein); 101.57 Take the necessary measures to effectively eliminate the worst forms of child labour (United States of America); 101.58 Continue to exert more effort to abolish child trafficking and sexual abuse of children and guarantee health and psychological care especially to the victims of rape; Rehabilitate them and support their inclusion in society; Ensure the prosecution and punishment of the perpetrators of those crimes and that they will not be exonerated (Libya); Continue its measures in the fight against the sexual abuse and exploitation of children by strengthening the implementation of its relevant national action plan (Malaysia); Improve prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution and punishment of those responsible for offences covered under the OP-CRC-SC, including through cooperation with neighbouring countries (Republic of Moldova); 101.59 Further develop efforts in the fight against trafficking in persons, including measures to protect victims. Strengthen efforts for the prevention of labour and sexual exploitation (Belarus); Intensify efforts to combat trafficking in persons while ensuring that appropriate access to remedy is provided to trafficking victims (Philippines); 101.60 Continue its effort in the active implementation of the National Strategy for the Fight against Human Trafficking and Illegal Migration (Cambodia); 101.61 Renew its respect for the rule of law by observing a strict separation between State and party activities and ensuring an independent judiciary and media (United States of America); 101.62 Ensure that there is a strict respect of the separation of powers and that laws are not applied selectively (Switzerland); 101.63 Implement measures under the rule of law chapter of the Reform Agenda as developed in the European Union High Level Accession Dialogue, to ensure that law enforcement agencies and the judiciary can work independently, without being politically influenced (Austria); 101.64 Pay due attention to transparency issues of the judiciary (Estonia); 101.65 Increase efforts to strengthen the merit-based recruitment of judges, inter alia, by effectively implementing the new Law on Courts requiring all newly appointed first-instance judges to have graduated from the Academy for Judges and Prosecutors two-year training programme (Sweden); 101.66 Continue its efforts to strengthen the judicial system and consolidate its independence (Morocco); 101.67 Strengthen efforts to consolidate the independence of the judiciary and to speed up implementation of measures aimed at reducing the backlog of cases before domestic courts (Slovakia); 101.68 Take more steps to protect the rights of all persons under legal processes of criminal justice and to guarantee due processes are applied to all of them (Viet Nam); 101.69 Take all necessary steps to strengthen public confidence in the justice system and limit the use of pretrial detention as strictly necessary (France); 101.70 Ensure that children are not treated as adult offenders in the administration of juvenile justice and that they are deprived of their liberty only as a measure of last resort (Republic of Moldova); 101.71 Enact a law on transparency in the allocation of public sector contracts including the allocation of works for the construction sector and the allocation of contracts to media (Mexico); 101.72 Improve media policy and regulations in order to ensure freedom of the press and of expression and to facilitate a more diverse media market (Australia); 101.73 Take steps to ensure media freedom and protection of journalists, including protection from political pressure and undue civil defamation lawsuits (Austria); 101.74 Prevent the introduction of new laws that would go against media pluralism and freedom (Belgium); 101.75 Examine the allegations of intimidating independent media by State institutions and ensure that appointments of members of the Broadcasting Council are made with an emphasis on the impartiality and professionalism of the candidates (Czech Republic); 101.76 Create an enabling environment for the independent operation of various media outlets, including guaranteeing their access to effective remedies in cases of alleged political pressure and interference (Czech Republic); 101.77 Continue to ensure the independence of the media and the press (Germany); 101.78 In cooperation with the media, implement the agreed action plan within the dialogue between the Government and the media community on improvement of media freedoms (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 101.79 Adopt all necessary measures to ensure freedom of expression by ensuring equal treatment of the media and by avoiding any interference with freedom of the press (France); 101.80 Introduce adequate measures with a view to promoting freedom of expression as well as media freedom (Greece); 101.81 Guarantee freedom of expression and media and ensure that national legislation fully complies with international freedom of expression standards (Lithuania); 101.82 Organize inclusive consultations with journalists and media in order to resolve disputes that exist concerning the new media law (Belgium); Engage constructively in consultations with civil society, broadcasters and other relevant stakeholders in order to cease the current status quo and public discontent over the procedure and content of the new draft media laws (Sweden); Re-launch the dialogue between government and media representatives with a view to encouraging pluralism in the media and strengthening the right of everybody to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, without interference by public authority (Italy); Restart the dialogue with media representatives on the road map for the implementation of the activities to safeguard freedom of expression in the country, those activities which are a priority in the framework of the High Level Accession Dialogue (Netherlands); Continue regular dialogue between the government and journalists in order to reach an agreement on pending issues in the media sector (Estonia); 101.83 Continue strengthening the legislation and measures for an appropriate exercise of freedom of expression, and ensure that the civil defamation law is not used to avoid political criticism (Spain); 101.84 Ensure that the new legislation regarding the media is applied in such a way that the media’s independence and pluralism is not undermined (Switzerland); 101.85 Facilitate the establishment of an appropriate self-regulatory media system (Belgium); 101.86 Ensure that the broadcasting of the public broadcaster is balanced and not favourable to any political party and that the Broadcasting Law is not applied selectively and abused for political process (Czech Republic); 101.87 Develop policies and measures to ensure equal access to services, particularly access to mainstream education, and participation of persons with disabilities in the elaboration and evaluation of programmes which concern them (Thailand); 101.88 Step up the actions in favour of fighting poverty and social exclusion, focusing on minorities and vulnerable persons (Senegal); 101.89 Develop primary health care guaranteeing access to medical services for all children, particularly those from the Roma community (Thailand); 101.90 Carry out a country-wide Roma needs assessment and health status study in consultation with Roma, Roma organizations, and health professionals, as the first step to defining a new national plan of action for ensuring that Roma have access to the highest attainable standard of health (Ireland); 101.91 Continue the implementation of national educational programmes and strategies in order to ensure that every child has equal access to education (Armenia); 101.92 Prioritize the education of its citizens (Nigeria); 101.93 Adopt further appropriate measures in order to improve the quality of education for the pupils belonging to national minorities, especially for those learning in lesser used languages (Romania); 101.94 Continue efforts to integrate Roma children into the education system (Algeria); 101.95 Pay particular attention to the access to education for all children, especially children from ethnic or religious minorities and children with disabilities (Belgium); 101.96 Continue its efforts in ensuring that the education system will benefit all groups in the society regardless of their backgrounds (Indonesia); 101.97 Address barriers to the education of women and girls and reduce their dropout rates, especially among girls from ethnic minorities (Slovenia); 101.98 Take further measures for the implementation of the Strategy on Integrated Education and to provide adequate State funding to be allocated for the implementation of this Strategy (Albania); Further implement integrated education and address the negative impact of ethnic segregation in schools, including through implementing common activities and policies to promote interaction between children of all linguistic and ethnic backgrounds (Slovenia); 101.99 Ensure that non impediments to the preservation, expression and development of cultural identity by all citizens are created (Bulgaria); 101.100 Continue efforts to ensure the rights of persons with disabilities aiming at the creation of the legal and institutional frameworks for the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, taking into account the national strategy adopted for 2010-2018 (Belarus); 101.101 Increase efforts to improve the protection of the rights of children with disabilities and their social inclusion in the education system, also by modernizing centres for social work and providing them with adequate human and financial resources (Italy); 101.102 Establish a procedure for determining the best interest of the children during all asylum and refugee processes (Hungary); 101.103 Continue to improve the condition of all migrants, particularly with regard to access to health, education and other social services, and accelerate efforts towards accession to ICRMW (Philippines); 101.104 Enhance the efforts aimed at monitoring the accomplishment of the human rights obligations relating to the enjoyment of a safe, clean, healthy, and sustainable environment, particularly with regard to air quality and industrial pollution (Italy). 102. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex 
[English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia was headed by Ambassador Igor Djundev, Director of the Directorate for Multilateral Affairs at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and composed of the following members: • Mr. Dusko Uzunovski, Minister Counsellor, Chargé d’affaires	 a.i., Permanent 
Mission, Geneva 
• Mrs.	 Elena Grozdanova – State Counsellor at the Ministry of Labour and Social 
Policy 
• Mrs. Svetlana Geleva, Assistant Director – Directorate of Multilateral Affairs at the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
• Mrs. Aneta Stanchevska, Assistant Minister – Ministry of Interior • Mr. Atulla Kasumi – State Counsellor at the Secretariat for the Implementation of 
the Ohrid Framework Agreement 
• Mrs. Mabera Kanberi – Head of Sector at the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy • Mr. Redzep Ali Cupi – Director of the Directorate for Promotion and Development 
of the Languages in the Education for Ethnic Minorities 
• Ms. Elena Bodeva, Human Rights Officer, HR Unit at the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs  
• Ms. Sanja Dimovska, Desk Officer at the Sector of International Legal Cooperation 
at the Ministry of Justice. 
