  United Nations  A/HRC/28/15    General Assembly  Distr.: General 10 December 2014  Original: English  Human Rights Council Twenty-eighth session Agenda item 6 Universal periodic review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   Slovenia Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–114 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–17 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  18–114 5  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  115–116 13  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  23   Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its twentieth session from 27 October to 7 November 2014. The review of Slovenia was held at the 13th meeting on 4 November 2014. The delegation of Slovenia was headed by Goran Klemen.i., Minister of Justice. At its 17th meeting, held on 6 November 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on Slovenia. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Slovenia: Botswana, Italy and Viet Nam. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Slovenia: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/1);  (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/SVN/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, the Czech Republic, Germany, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Slovenia through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review.  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation of Slovenia reiterated that human rights were among the key principles upon which the Republic of Slovenia was built. It reported that since the submission of its national report, the participation of women in the national assembly and in the Government had increased. Since mid-October an important new draft of a law on same-sex civil partnerships was under public discussion.  6. The delegation stated that the Government had substantially reduced the backlog in reporting to the human rights treaty bodies and added that in July 2014, Slovenia had submitted its third report under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and its initial report under the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD). It had also just submitted an updated common core document.  7. Some areas where Slovenia has achieved significant progress since 2010 were highlighted. The delegation underscored the measures taken to resolve the status of persons erased from the register of permanent residents. A law regulating their status was passed in 2010 and gave the erased the possibility to regulate their status and obtain permanent residence permits from the erasure onwards. A special compensation scheme took effect in June 2014, according to which a beneficiary can claim compensation. 8. Slovenia stated it had further reduced court backlogs to the point where they could no longer be considered a systemic problem.  9. Touching upon austerity measures, the delegation assured they were carefully re-examined with a view to minimizing the impact on the most vulnerable. Social transfers played a very important role in poverty reduction in Slovenia.  10. The delegation addressed questions received in advance of the interactive dialogue, first providing additional information regarding questions received from the Czech Republic, Mexico, the Netherlands, Spain and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland on the erased and presenting the concrete measures in the Compensation Act.  11. On the questions received in advance from Belgium, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland about the Roma, the delegation referred to the improvement in the housing conditions of the Roma, which is a priority of the National Programme of Measures for Roma for the period 2010–2015 and with progress reached in many Roma settlements during recent years.  12. On trafficking in human beings, in response to inquiries by the Czech Republic, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the delegation reiterated the importance it attaches to the issue. The delegation asserted that the National Coordinator reports annually to the Government and the National Assembly on preventive measures and assistance to all victims of trafficking.  13. In answering Belgium on discrimination against the children of same-sex couples in schools, based on their family’s sexual orientation, the delegation, in presenting relevant awareness-raising activities, highlighted a book “My name is Damjan” on lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) persons that all secondary school students were receiving during the current school year. In responses to the question of Spain, it explained that the Slovenian Ministry of Health and the blood transfusion service were currently considering their existing practices, with a view to adapting it to both medical requirements for ensuring a high level of protection for recipients of blood and the principle of non-discrimination.  14. In addressing a question from Mexico, the delegation reiterated that in Slovenia, gender equality is a right, a goal and a horizontal principle permeating all spheres of life of both women and men during all periods of life. Slovenia further specified the position of women in the labour market, whereby the wage gap is among the lowest in Europe, i.e. approximately 2.5 per cent in 2012. He also presented an important awareness-raising project in regard to combating violence against women: “VESNA — to live a life free of violence.”  15. The delegation addressed questions by Norway about overcrowding in Slovene prisons, explaining that overcrowding was only an issue in one prison during a short time period and was being remedied by various measures. Regarding the ruling of the European Court on Human Rights foreign currency deposits in Ljubljanska Banka, the Government had appointed a working group for its implementation and was preparing an action plan, which will be presented to the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe by mid-January 2015. 16. The delegation also emphasized that discussions on the strengthening of the Human Rights Ombudsperson are currently ongoing, in order to qualify for Group A accreditation status by the International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights.  17. The delegation addressed questions by Belgium, explaining that interministerial coordination procedures were under way regarding ratification of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) on a communications procedure and that ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance  (ICPPED) was under discussion in Slovenia, as was also the ratification of the amendment to article 8 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD).  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 18. During the interactive dialogue, 72 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 19. The Islamic Republic of Iran welcomed the signature and ratification of international instruments and changes to health-care legislation, including the Health Services Act. It reiterated concerns expressed by OHCHR regarding violence against women and children, domestic violence and violence against Roma. 20. Iraq commended actions to implement the recommendations accepted during the first cycle of the universal periodic review. It also welcomed measures regarding domestic violence, trafficking in persons and the protection of children. It noted guarantees of equal treatment for all and protection from discrimination. 21. Ireland welcomed the standing invitation to special procedures and progress regarding “erased” persons, reiterating concerns on implementation in that regard. It noted slow progress regarding A status accreditation for the Human Rights Ombudsman, despite acceptance of the relevant recommendations. 22. Israel welcomed measures regarding social protection, children and youth and trafficking in persons. It expressed concern regarding discrimination towards citizens and migrants, noting the failure to implement recommendations regarding discrimination against Roma accepted during the first cycle of the universal periodic review. 23. Italy welcomed measures to combat violence against women, asking for implementation details and any best practices regarding the national programme on prevention of family violence, and whether a new programme was being considered. It noted efforts regarding Roma rights and minority languages. 24. Kuwait welcomed the efforts regarding women’s and children’s rights, education, integrity and corruption, and the reduction in the court backlog. It called for more women in high-level political positions and implementation of the Special Rapporteur’s recommendations on water and sanitation, noting cooperation. 25. Malaysia appreciated the measures to implement the recommendations accepted during the first cycle of the universal periodic review, particularly progress on facilitating places of worship for minority groups, on which it urged further action. It called for policies and programmes to reduce prejudice towards minority groups. 26. Montenegro noted the implementation of previously accepted recommendations, welcoming amendments to the criminal code. It asked how the Employment Relationship Act had affected women’s participation in public and private labour markets and requested information on the national programme of measures for Roma, noting progress. 27. Morocco noted the information on the implementation of previously accepted recommendations and measures to strengthen the institutional framework, notably through the Human Rights Ombudsman. It welcomed amendments to the criminal code and measures to incorporate human rights education into school programmes and training modules. 28. The Netherlands welcomed progress regarding the efficiency of the legal system and the backlog of cases. It commended the efforts on gender equality and violence against women, stressing the importance of protecting women and girls and improving the treatment of minorities. 29. New Zealand welcomed the opportunity to discuss human rights issues of shared concern and recognized the challenges faced. It offered to share its own experiences in dealing with the issue of domestic violence with Slovenia. 30. Nicaragua highlighted Slovenia’s progress in combating trafficking in persons, in line with the recommendations made during the first cycle. It also welcomed the progress made in terms of gender equality and the empowerment and increased participation of women in decision-making. 31. Nigeria applauded the progress made regarding children’s rights and urged incorporation of the views of children into relevant decision-making processes. It acknowledged the compulsory health insurance scheme and encouraged the introduction of better provisions for retired persons and ill persons. 32. Norway regretted the reduced inclusivity of the universal periodic review process, noting interruptions in the work of the relevant interdepartmental committee. It noted the previous recommendations regarding Roma that had been accepted, welcoming cooperation in that regard. It welcomed measures regarding human trafficking and children’s rights. 33. Pakistan called for further efforts to address discrimination against religious and ethnic minorities, particularly regarding health, education and the prevention of torture by law enforcement agencies. It echoed concerns raised by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination over inadequate prosecution of racially motivated offences. 34. The Philippines welcomed Slovenia’s efforts to fight trafficking in persons and protect the rights of migrants. It stressed that adequate resources are needed for the implementation of programmes on family violence, children and youth, persons with disabilities and against discrimination.  35. Poland welcomed efforts by Slovenia to comply with the recommendations accepted during the first cycle of the universal periodic review. However, it expressed concern regarding the juvenile justice system and the situation of children from minority groups.  36. Portugal welcomed efforts to enhance the role of women in society and the labour market and the plan to implement Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), which represented progress towards ending violence against women and girls. It commended the efforts to combat discrimination. 37. The Republic of Moldova inquired about the effects of applying the upgraded police restraining orders. It noted with appreciation the steps taken by Slovenia to prevent and combat trafficking in persons. 38. The Russian Federation noted Slovenia’s efforts to protect human rights. It noted, however, that the situation of Roma remained problematic and the special legal status and rights granted to the Roma community had not been implemented in practice. 39. Saudi Arabia noted institutional changes and the adoption of laws and policies to protect and promote human rights. It also noted the programmes that had been implemented to address needs of persons in poverty and the rights of children. 40. Senegal noted with satisfaction the progress made in the area of social protection, protection of children, the fight against discrimination and domestic violence, as well as housing and health care for migrants and asylum seekers. 41. Serbia encouraged Slovenia to continue its efforts in implementing the recommendations from the first review and to have an inclusive interpretation of the Act on the Legal Status of Citizens of Former Yugoslavia Living in Slovenia. 42. Sierra Leone commended Slovenia for setting up robust legal and institutional frameworks to address human rights, ensure social rights and reduce poverty, despite the economic situation. It encouraged Slovenia to bring the Office of the Ombudsman into line with the Paris Principles. 43. Slovakia commended Slovenia for ratifying several international human rights instruments and for its efforts to improve the integration of Roma and combat discrimination against Roma. It encouraged Slovenia to continue modernizing Roma settlements and ensuring funding for Roma teaching assistants.  44. Spain welcomed Slovenia’s institutional structure to combat discrimination, but stressed the need for enhanced coordination within it. It lauded Slovenia’s progress in the protection of persons with disabilities, but expressed concerns regarding the rights of Roma and homosexual couples.  45. Sri Lanka commended the efforts to enhance the legal and institutional framework and to promote the rights of women, children and Roma. It encouraged Slovenia to safeguard the rights of the most vulnerable groups through social assistance. 46. Sweden welcomed Slovenia’s commitment to combating violence and discrimination on all grounds, including sexual orientation and gender identity. However, it noted the concern expressed by the Committee on the Rights of the Child about discrimination against the children of same-sex couples. 47. Thailand noted with appreciation the inclusive compulsory health insurance scheme. However, it noted reports of an increasing number of persons without adequate health insurance and asked for more information about existing gaps. It also noted the challenges faced by minorities. 48. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia welcomed the ratification of international human rights instruments and the progress made since the first cycle of the universal periodic review regarding “erased” persons and the consultative body for the situation of persons from former Yugoslav republics. It requested information on monitoring and corrective measures concerning discrimination against Roma. 49. Tunisia noted the ratification of regional and international instruments, the amended constitution and criminal code and the efforts made against human trafficking and racial discrimination. It encouraged Slovenia to reform the Human Rights Ombudsman to comply with the Paris Principles. 50. Turkey asked for more information on the resolution on the national social assistance programme 2013–2020 and the national reform programmes. It observed Slovenia’s determination to resolve the issue of “erased persons”. 51. Ukraine recognized Slovenia’s commitment to human rights and its efforts to improve the institutional and legislative framework, including the ratification of international instruments. It noted the steps taken to protect persons with a disability,and encouraged Slovenia to continue related programmes and to allocate resources for their implementation.  52. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland noted the steps taken to resolve the status of “erased” persons. It encouraged Slovenia to make further efforts for the restoration of their rights and to close legal gaps in that regard. It also encouraged measures to eliminate discrimination against Roma. 53. Regarding the rights of the Roma population, the delegation of Slovenia recalled that Roma had special protection under the constitution and through the 2007 Roma Community Act. A national programme of measures for Roma for the period 2015–2020 was being developed to follow up on the existing one and would focus on living conditions, employment, social inclusion, health, culture and languages. 54. Recognizing the ongoing challenge of human rights and social inclusion, the delegation noted a significant improvement, owing to government efforts and those of the international community and non-governmental organizations. Dialogue between the Government and communities had improved. Targeted programmes included community policing and training for police officers, and the first female Roma police officer had entered the police force. 55. School classes were not segregated; Roma children were part of the mainstream education system. However, under the strategy for the education of Roma, Roma teaching assistants were employed to improve achievements and attendance at school, and provided a bridge between the school and national authorities and the Roma community. 56. The delegation asserted that few Roma settlements did not have access to water, following the enforcement of legislation requiring every settlement with more than 50 permanent residents to have a public water supply. Remaining problems were being resolved, following recommendations by the Special Rapporteur on the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation. Slovenia was considering elevating the right to water to the constitutional level. 57. Slovenia drew attention to the role of the Government Council for Issues concerning the National Communities of Members of Nations of the Former SFRY in Slovenia as a consultative body.  58. Recalling that 25,000 people had been “erased” from the register of permanent residents, Slovenia noted that their change in status had not affected their citizenship, but had had an impact on their enjoyment of the rights accorded only to residents. Thirteen thousand persons had had their status restored, while others had returned to their own nations. The Act Regulating the Legal Status of Citizens of Former Yugoslavia Living in Slovenia covered all “erased” groups and their children, including those living abroad, and the Act on Compensations for Persons Erased from the Register of Permanent Residents applied to all persons, irrespective of the success of their residence claim. The delegation recognized that the system still faced challenges, with large numbers of cases and the legislation being challenged before the Constitutional Court. However, prejudice against “erased” persons had reduced dramatically. 59. The delegation emphasized that in Slovenia, hate speech, promoting intolerance and xenophobia were crimes and resulted in prosecution; however, Slovenia did not experience a lot of hate speech against minorities or religious intolerance. 60. Returning to the promotion of gender equality, the delegation reiterated that the situation had improved significantly in the media, politics and the public sector, where 70 per cent of judges were women, but noted ongoing challenges in the corporate sector, where only 5 per cent of chief executives were women. 61. Legislation and programmes had been adopted, in conjunction with the police and social services, to combat gender-based and domestic violence and to raise awareness of that issue. 62. Italian and Hungarian minorities had special constitutional status; they were allocated two seats in the parliament and at least four public prosecutors were required to have good knowledge of either the Italian or Hungarian languages. Funding was also allocated to minority languages within the education system and the media.  63. Children’s rights were enshrined in the constitution and various acts, and were protected within the education system and a special department had also been established under the Human Rights Ombudsman. In criminal proceedings, the law provided for free and impartial legal assistance for children who were witnesses or victims of crime and perpetrators of crime over the age of 16 were prosecuted under a juvenile justice system, in line with international standards. 64. Regrettably, some children had experienced poverty as a result of the recent economic crisis. Social transfers, school grants, free school lunches, subsidies, free access to health care for children and adolescents were ways in which Slovenia had sought to mitigate the impact of the crisis on children. The 2015 budget would take into account the need for ongoing provision of social assistance. 65. Regarding the rights of the elderly, the delegation explained that a special office would be established under the new coalition agreement and that it was recognized that elderly persons were a vulnerable group. Despite the financial crisis, pensions had not decreased and there was a highly developed network of public and private care homes. 66. Responding to queries on trafficking in persons, Slovenia confirmed that it implemented a human rights-based approach and that all relevant conventions had been ratified. Awareness and training programmes had been introduced, in cooperation with the National Coordinator for the Fight against Trafficking in Persons, the Prosecutor’s Office and non-governmental organizations, as well as safe houses. However, the National Coordinator’s Office required strengthening and more funding. 67. Slovenia acknowledged a past violation of article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights. However, it asserted that it had made dramatic changes, notably in establishing an independent department in the Prosecutor’s Office to examine alleged human rights violations by the security forces. Police legislation and complaints procedures had been updated and international monitoring bodies now considered the police to be responsive regarding the protection of human rights. 68. A new draft law regarding same-sex civil partnerships was under public discussion. Previous efforts in that regard had failed, but under the coalition Government agreement the issue had been reviewed and the new law would hopefully be adopted in 2015.  69. The delegation stated that it would strive to make progress in ratifying outstanding conventions. 70. The United States of America urged acceleration of the efforts to compensate “erased” persons. It expressed concern regarding ongoing discrimination and harassment of the Roma, limited access to justice and unclear sanctions for employers interfering with trade unions. 71. Uruguay noted the strategy for the inclusion of Roma for the period 2015–2020 and encouraged Slovenia to redouble its efforts regarding persons pertaining to minorities, considering their particular vulnerability and difficulty in accessing basic rights.  72. Uzbekistan commended the strengthened regulatory and institutional human rights mechanisms and improvements to the health and education systems. It referred to concerns expressed regarding the marginalization of Roma, prison overcrowding, gender-based violence and the trafficking of women and girls for sexual exploitation. 73. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela welcomed Slovenia’s efforts to combat domestic violence and protect migrants. It expressed concerns regarding the corporal punishment of children, trafficking in persons, ill-treatment during detention, the persistent case backlog and discrimination against Roma and “erased” persons.  74. Viet Nam welcomed the implementation of recommendations accepted during the first cycle of the universal periodic review and encouraged further efforts towards the full enjoyment of human rights. It took note of measures to improve the normative and institutional framework. 75. Afghanistan commended the efforts undertaken since the first cycle of the universal periodic review, including the ratification of international instruments. It noted steps to ensure gender equality and prevent gender-based discrimination, particularly in the labour market, and the criminalization of trafficking in persons. 76. Algeria welcomed the strengthened legal framework to combat the sexual exploitation of children and measures against hate speech and intolerance. Despite economic difficulties, legislation had been amended to ensure financial support for minority groups. It noted the ratification of regional instruments. 77. Angola welcomed the particular attention given to the promotion of the rights of persons with disabilities. While recognizing positive reforms of the law on minorities, Angola remained concerned by certain acts of intolerance against them. 78. Argentina welcomed advances regarding persons with disabilities, such as the Law on Equal Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities and the action programme for persons with disabilities 2014–2021. 79. Armenia commended legislative and administrative initiatives, including towards gender equality, the right to health, combating discrimination and trafficking in persons. It noted Slovenia’s commitment to human rights education, which was included in the national school system and in training programmes. 80. Australia noted progress regarding the issue of “erased persons”, but remained concerned that “erased” citizens and the Roma population continued to face discrimination and violations of their rights. It welcomed the establishment of equality bodies.  81. Austria welcomed the national programme of measures for Roma people, aimed at combating discrimination, and the study on the ethnic vitality of areas inhabited by small minority ethnic groups and autochthonous peoples, aimed at identifying cultural needs, including those of German-speaking communities. 82. Azerbaijan noted institutional and legal reforms and steps towards establishing a national human rights institution. It expressed concern regarding reports of discrimination, particularly against Roma, ongoing trafficking in persons and the sexual exploitation of children. 83. Bahrain commended the progress made since the first cycle of the universal periodic review. It noted measures to guarantee the rights of minorities, but remained concerned about persistent discrimination against ethnic minorities. Bahrain urged measures to ensure their social integration. 84. Belgium welcomed political measures on social protection, children, protection against domestic violence, trafficking in persons and Roma. However, it noted that progress could still be made in fighting against discrimination. 85. Benin welcomed the ratification of the the European Council Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse and the adoption of a national programme of measures for Roma for the period 2010–2015. 86. Bosnia and Herzegovina commended the mid-term universal periodic review report, the amended criminal code and the improved rights of migrant workers. It asked about plans to implement European Court of Human Rights rulings regarding “erased” persons and plans to expand the list of constitutionally-recognized minorities. 87. Brazil noted the progress in children’s rights and efforts to promote gender equality and the empowerment of women. It welcomed the national programme of measures for Roma. It expressed concern regarding the rights of “erased” persons, encouraging efforts to provide compensation. 88. Bulgaria acknowledged the ratification of a number of international treaties since the first review and asked for further information about the current state of the ratification process. It also assessed as positive developments in addressing discrimination against certain groups. 89. Chile highlighted the implementation of public policies and the evolution of the normative and institutional frameworks reflected in the adoption of laws, such as the modification of the penal code and the Law on Migration, as well as the ratification of several international instruments.  90. China noted with satisfaction awareness-raising measures to combat discrimination, hate speech and intolerance. Slovenia promoted gender equality, enacted laws to guarantee the rights for persons with disabilities and took measures to improve the rights of the Roma and other minorities. 91. Costa Rica encouraged the ratification of ICPPED and highlighted efforts to achieve an increase in the percentage of women in posts involving political accountability, in order to promote the empowerment of women.  92. Côte d’Ivoire noted with satisfaction the reforms in the education system to make it inclusive, policies to protect the environment to ensure a healthy living environment and measures to protect vulnerable people. 93. Croatia commended the implementation of recommendations from the first UPR, especially those related to the strengthening of the legislative framework; and efforts regarding the most vulnerable social groups. It asked about the intention to re-establish the former Office for Equal Opportunities.  94. Cuba expressed concern about the effects of the economic crisis on the economic and social rights of the population and stated that unemployment, the decrease in the income of the population and the increase in the number of persons at risk of poverty must be specially attended to. 95. The Czech Republic welcomed the measures taken regarding “erased persons” and trafficking in human beings. However, it emphasized that, according to the report of the Council of Europe expert group on human trafficking, additional improvements remain to be made.  96. Ecuador welcomed the efforts to comply with recommendations from the 2009 universal periodic review and the ratification of International Labour Organization (ILO) conventions Nos. 144, 151, 155, 171, 183 and 187.  97. Egypt commended the commitment to the human rights of women and children since the last review; the amendment of the criminal code; the adoption of the National Plan on Youth; and the strengthening of anti-corruption measures. It encouraged Slovenia to address the issues reported by the United Nations human rights mechanisms.  98. Estonia noted the progress in almost all human rights areas and the implementation of most of the recommendations. It commended the measures regarding: trafficking in human beings; gender equality and discrimination against women; violence against women and domestic violence; and the most vulnerable groups. 99. France welcomed the delegation of Slovenia and made two recommendations. 100. Greece noted several changes in the normative and institutional framework in the protection and promotion of human rights. It asked Slovenia for an evaluation of the performance of the new office responsible for the dialogue with civil society and for coordination of citizens’ initiatives.  101. Guatemala welcomed projects for the promotion and protection of human rights, such as the “Achieve equality within diversity” project, which included awareness-raising of the campaign entitled “Equal in diversity – getting there”. 102. Hungary believed that the situation of the autochthonous Hungarian community could be improved in the fields of political participation, education and the use of the national language. It also noted that many children were still stateless because their parents were part of the so-called “erased” group. 103. India welcomed the national programme of measures for Roma people and the Legal Status Act 2010. However, it remained concerned at the discrimination faced by Roma and the so-called “erased people”. India welcomed the amendments to the criminal code expanding the definition of human trafficking. 104. Indonesia welcomed the steps taken to combat trafficking in persons. While appreciating the initiatives carried out to fight discrimination, Indonesia encouraged Slovenia to continue to step up its efforts in that regard. 105. Peru welcomed Slovenia’s measures to combat trafficking in persons, the approval of a plan of action on persons with disabilities and the ratification of the European conventions on violence against women and on the protection of children against sexual exploitation. 106. Mexico welcomed the changes made to the penal code to criminalize the abduction of children under 15 for sexual purposes and welcomed the Law Regulating the Legal Status of Citizens of Former Yugoslavia Living in Slovenia.  107. Romania appreciated the ratification of international instruments relating to human rights and the adoption of legislative and policy measures aimed at fighting trafficking in persons. It also appreciated the fact that Slovenia had provided a mid-term report on implementation of the recommendations from the first cycle.  108. The delegation of Slovenia noted significant improvements in court backlogs, thanks to targeted improvement measures and despite a reduction in the number of judges, owing to judicial reforms. While issues remained, the system was becoming more effective. 109. Trade unions enjoyed strong legal protection and were powerful interlocutors in the public and private sectors.  110. Slovenia stressed that corporal punishment was not used in schools and institutions and was generally considered unacceptable. The Family Violence Prevention Act prohibited all violence against children. The family code, due for adoption in 2015, would contain a full ban on corporal punishment. 111. The cultural rights of ethnic minority groups were upheld by the constitution and the Ministry of Culture. The Ministry of Culture financed increasing numbers of programmes in support of minority groups each year. For example, a bilateral agreement between Slovenia and Austria on cooperation in culture, education and science served the German-speaking population of Slovenia, and special attention had been paid to that group under the national culture programme. 112. Slovenia noted that, despite a ban on child labour, some isolated cases had been observed in 2013. The Government had responded by commissioning a study and raising awareness among inspection bodies. 113. Regarding persons with disabilities, Slovenia believed that the current normative system was adequate. However, barriers to participation still existed and Slovenia had implemented various measures in response. 114. In conclusion, Slovenia reconfirmed its desire to progress in protecting human rights, describing the universal periodic review process as an opportunity for constructive dialogue. It stated that it would endeavour to tackle new challenges and recurring recommendations and issues, following up immediately on the second cycle of the universal periodic review through discussions with all stakeholders.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**  ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 115. The recommendations listed below will be examined by Slovenia which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-eighth session of the Human Rights  Council in March 2015: 115.1 Take further steps for the ratification of several international treaties in the field of human rights that were signed by Slovenia since the first UPR cycle (Croatia);  115.2 Expedite the process of ratification of the amendment to article 8 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Belgium);  115.3 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Portugal, Slovakia); 115.4 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Spain, Tunisia, Portugal);  115.5 Proceed with the ratification of the Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, which was the object of a recommendation accepted by Slovenia during the first cycle (Spain);  115.6 Ratify the International Convention on the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW) (Iran (Islamic Republic of));  115.7 Consider taking initial steps towards the ratification of ICRMW (Philippines);  115.8 Ratify ICRMW (Senegal, Sierra Leone, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Peru, Uruguay); 115.9 Consider ratifying ICRMW (Sri Lanka);  115.10 Ratify ICRMW (Bosnia and Herzegovina);  115.11 Consider the possibility of ratifying the Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Ecuador);  115.12 Ratify the International Convention on the Rights of Migrant Workers and Members of their Family, based on the facts that the national report indicates in paragraph 98 that it is currently under examination (Egypt); 115.13 Continue its efforts to ratify ICRMW (Indonesia);  115.14 Ratify the International Convention on Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Iraq);  115.15 Ratify the Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Uruguay);  115.16 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Belgium, France, Tunisia, Sierra Leone, Argentina); 115.17 Accede to the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness and take all relevant measures in order to reduce the number of stateless persons (Hungary);  115.18 Ratify the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence, also known as the Istanbul Convention, which it signed on 8 September 2011 (Turkey);  115.19 Repeal provisions of the Marriage and Family Relations Act that are not compliant with the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Israel);  115.20 Draft a comprehensive law on children to incorporate in Slovenian domestic law all the provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Viet Nam);  115.21 Ensure that Slovenia’s national legislation is fully harmonized with international standards to comply with its commitments under international treaties, especially with regard to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, CRC and ICERD (Bahrain);  115.22 Broaden the mandate and powers of the institutions tasked with guaranteeing the principle of equality and non-discrimination (Israel);  115.23 Continue its efforts in the promotion and protection of women’s and children’s rights (Kuwait); 115.24 Continue its efforts with a view to the effective implementation of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Education and Training (Morocco);  115.25 Place a particular focus on the education and employability of Roma women in integration policies, since women and children are the most vulnerable groups within the Roma community (Norway);  115.26 Consider the establishment of an office of the ombudsman for children’s rights, devoted purely to the protection of the rights of children (Poland);  115.27 Consider developing national human rights indicators as an instrument that allows for a more precise and coherent evaluation of the effective implementation of human rights (Portugal);  115.28 Enact a unified and comprehensive law on child rights (Saudi Arabia); 115.29 Continue efforts towards the introduction of human rights training in the educational system and training programmes (Senegal);  115.30 Continue the steps aimed at the promotion of human rights education at the national and international levels (Armenia);  115.31 Broaden the mandate of its equality bodies and increase their human and financial resources (Australia);  115.32 Take further steps towards strengthening the mandate of the Human Rights Ombudsman in order to ensure full compliance with the Paris Principles (Ireland);  115.33 Bring its Human Rights Ombudsman’s Office into compliance with the Paris Principles, including by providing it with adequate financial and human resources (Malaysia);  115.34 Strengthen the mandates of the Ombudsman for Human Rights and the Defender of the Principle of Equality and avoid any overlap in the execution of their respective mandates (Morocco);  115.35 Accelerate the process of reform of the Ombudsman for Human Rights in order to comply with the Paris Principles (Tunisia);  115.36 Bring the national human rights institution into compliance with the Paris Principles and broaden its mandate to carry out investigations into allegations of torture and ill-treatment (Ukraine);  115.37 Create the conditions that allow the Human Rights Ombudsperson to acquire A status according to the Paris Principles, by enlarging its mandate to receive allegations of torture and abuse and by providing it with the necessary resources to enable it to fulfil its functions (Chile);  115.38 Ensure the compliance of its National Ombudsman with the Paris Principles (Egypt); continue with the efforts to guarantee compliance of the Human Rights Ombudsperson with the Paris Principles (Peru); take more effective measures in order to bring the Ombudsman’s Office into compliance with the Paris Principles (Azerbaijan);  115.39 Take the necessary steps to include the Human Rights Ombudsman under Group A of the Paris Principles relating to the status of national human rights institutions (Greece);  115.40 Implement the 2006–2016 Programme for Children and Youth (Israel);  115.41 Adopt amendments to the Marriage and Family Relations Act in line with previous efforts and add a provision that prohibits other forms of demeaning treatment of children, such as psychological violence (Norway);  115.42 Implement the child and youth programme of 2013–2016 (Saudi Arabia); 115.43 Increase cooperation with relevant United Nations treaty bodies, in particular by submitting its periodic report to the Human Rights Committee overdue since 2010 (Uzbekistan);  115.44 Address discrimination by the public and private sectors as a matter of priority (Israel);  115.45 Step up efforts to prevent or limit hatred, racist and xenophobic acts and speeches, including on the Internet (Malaysia);  115.46 Take the necessary steps for the criminalization of all acts of intolerance and hate speech (Pakistan);  115.47 Strengthen measures to combat discrimination and facilitate victims’ access to remedies (Senegal);  115.48 Establish a better coordination between the different institutional bodies competent in matters of non-discrimination (Spain);  115.49 Intensify its efforts to fight discrimination and intolerance, particularly against Muslims, immigrants and people of African descent, and encourage senior State officials and politicians to take a clear stand against racist or xenophobic political discourse (Tunisia);  115.50 Adopt policies to ensure equality of rights for all persons, without discrimination of gender, religion, race or sexual orientation, in line with international standards (Uruguay);  115.51 Take the necessary measures to effectively fight against discrimination by public and private actors (Belgium);  115.52 Strengthen measures to ensure that there are effective remedies for potential victims of discrimination (Benin);  115.53 Continue to formulate, implement and enhance public policies aimed at raising awareness of discrimination-related issues in society and ensure effective remedies to victims of discrimination and statelessness (Brazil);  115.54 Pursue and strengthen policies against discrimination and intolerance (Côte d’Ivoire);  115.55 Ensure follow-up of legislative measures for the protection and inclusion of foreigners (Côte d’Ivoire);  115.56 Take concrete measures to prevent racially motivated crimes and investigate and prosecute all acts of political discourse against minorities (Egypt);  115.57 Continue with the campaign to eliminate all forms of discrimination, particularly from school age and through human rights education (Mexico);  115.58 Ensure thorough implementation of the anti-discrimination legislation in order to prevent and combat the discrimination based on any criteria, notably racial and ethnic (Romania);  115.59 Continue making efforts to achieve full social equality between men and women (Nicaragua);  115.60 Adopt proactive measures to ensure access to equal opportunities and promote equal gender representation in decision-making positions, and implement non-discriminatory policies to ensure equal pay for women and men (Bahrain);  115.61 Take appropriate measures to enable more women to hold elective offices (Benin);  115.62 Increase its efforts to combat racial discrimination and racist attacks, particularly against the Roma (Iran (Islamic Republic of));  115.63 Introduce measures that will prevent discrimination against Roma and make further efforts to combat all forms of intolerance and racism (Nigeria);  115.64 Continue its policy to establish a climate of trust, understanding and mutual respect between the different religions in the country (Morocco);  115.65 Adopt non-discriminatory policies with regard to the realization of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights of all ethnic and religious communities, without any discrimination (Pakistan);  115.66 Continue to combat intolerance based on ethnic origin and ensure the full respect of the human rights of the so-called “erased” people (Portugal);  115.67 Ensure that Roma children have equal opportunities in access to quality education at all levels (Slovakia);  115.68 Strengthen efforts to combat discrimination against children belonging to national minorities, particularly Roma, and reduce the number of children living in poverty (Poland);  115.69 Step up efforts to combat discrimination against national minorities, including Roma, and provide the victims of discrimination with access to effective legal protection (Russian Federation);  115.70 Criminalize all acts of discrimination directed against Roma persons (Sierra Leone);  115.71 Take further measures to combat all forms of discrimination against the Roma community and ensure equal opportunities for their enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights, including education, health, employment and housing (Sri Lanka);  115.72 Further improve the living conditions of Roma, especially ensuring access to running water, electricity and housing, as well as providing education, employment and health care for all members of the Roma community (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia);  115.73 Measurably improve access to the legal system for Roma individuals and other individuals belonging to groups facing discrimination, and carry out a campaign to increase awareness among these minorities of their rights and means of redress when infringements occur (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);  115.74 Strengthen legislative and practical measures to prevent all forms of discrimination against ethnic minorities and foreigners (Uzbekistan);  115.75 Guarantee the right of Roma people to adequate housing, water and sanitation, work, education, and security of tenure of their settlements (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of));  115.76 Take the necessary measures to fight all forms of intolerance and hate speech against persons belonging to minorities (Algeria);  115.77 Strengthen its policy aimed at combating prejudice against minorities (Angola);  115.78 Take the additional measures necessary to eliminate discrimination against the Roma community and other vulnerable groups in the country (Argentina);  115.79 Strengthen its human rights framework, including access to human rights training, in order to increase protections for Roma people against violations of their rights (Australia);  115.80 Combat discrimination against Roma and implement special measures in the education, housing, health and employment spheres, as well as investigating and prosecuting all discriminatory acts directed at Roma children (Azerbaijan);  115.81 Adopt immediate and positive measures to combat all forms of discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance against the Roma communities and other ethnic groups, with regard to access to housing, quality education, employment and health care (Bahrain);  115.82 Take further measures to provide security of tenure and promote access to water, sanitation, education, health and employment for all Roma communities (Brazil);  115.83 Intensify its efforts to ensure that the Roma are not victims of discrimination, especially in areas such as access to housing and the right to drinking water and sanitation (Chile);  115.84 Continue to increase input into education for Roma and other minorities (China);  115.85 Strengthen activities to raise awareness in society of the need to eliminate discrimination, intolerance and hate speech against minorities and other groups (Costa Rica);  115.86 Continue reinforcing measures to guarantee respect for the human rights of national communities, Roma and other ethnic groups (Cuba);  115.87 Strengthen measures to combat discrimination, with special attention to the situation of minorities, by adopting laws and policies for the effective promotion and protection of their rights (Ecuador);  115.88 Take further measures to combat marginalization and discrimination against Roma (Greece);  115.89 Accelerate approval of the reforms of the Roma Community Act and strengthen coordination with all actors involved to address the strategies of the national programme of measures for Roma (Mexico);  115.90 Continue to improve Roma conditions, access to housing, water, sanitation, education and employment and make further efforts to combat all forms of intolerance and racism against them (Thailand);  115.91 Strengthen efforts to reduce disparities in the enjoyment of rights between children of minority groups, particularly Roma children and children of the majority of the population (Austria);  115.92 Harmonize the rights of homosexual couples with those of heterosexual couples (Spain);  115.93 Heed the call by the Committee on the Rights of the Child to regularize the status of children of same-sex couples and ensure their protection against discrimination (Sweden);  115.94 Bring forward legislation providing a clear legal process for the restoration of rights for individuals affected by the erasure (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);  115.95 Enact comprehensive legislation addressing the situation of the “erased”, ensuring them appropriate assistance and protection (Uruguay);  115.96 Immediately restitute permanent residence for the “erased” persons and adequately compensate them (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of));  115.97 Recognize fully the civil and political rights of “erased” citizens and facilitate their complete social integration (Australia);  115.98 Adopt the same-sex partnership act in order to further improve the rights of LGBTI persons (Croatia);  115.99 Adopt further measures to facilitate effective access of the so-called “erased” to permanent residency and citizenship (Czech Republic);  115.100 Take all appropriate measures to enable and facilitate the acquisition of Slovenian citizenship by the “erased persons”, paying particular attention to the children of “erased persons” in 1992, who are still stateless. Ensure compensation for all “erased persons” and, in this regard, review their compensation schemes, on the basis of the amounts and criteria established by the European Court of Human Rights and ensure the implementation of measures to reintegrate “erased persons” (France);  115.101 That the youth guarantee scheme is implemented without discrimination and sufficient budget allocated for its effective implementation (India);  115.102 Take comprehensive measures to protect the rights of all national minorities, including the so-called erased people and promote their full integration into society (India); 115.103 Take legal measures aimed at preventing ethnically motivated crimes (Iran (Islamic Republic of));  115.104 Establish a clear and comprehensive definition of violence against childre, and prosecute all forms of violence, including domestic violence (Sierra Leone);  115.105 Take the necessary measures for setting up a comprehensive national strategy to prevent and address all forms of violence against women and children (Iran (Islamic Republic of));  115.106 Take further steps to implement the national programme of family violence prevention (netherlands); ensure implementation of the national programme of family violence prevention (2009–2014) and prevent all forms of violence against women and children, including domestic violence (Bahrain);  115.107 Concentrate attention on domestic violence (New Zealand);  115.108 Adopt a national strategy on combating domestic violence (Russian Federation); 115.109 Strengthen the measures undertaken to combat domestic violence in general and violence against children in particular (Algeria);  115.110 Broaden the definition of violence in the Law on the Prevention of Domestic Violence, according to international standards, with a view to eliminating all forms of violence against women and girls (Mexico);  115.111 Establish an institutional mechanism to combat discrimination and violence against women and children, particularly children from minority peoples (Viet Nam);  115.112 Adopt a comprehensive national strategy to prevent and combat all forms of violence against children (Iraq);  115.113 Continue to strengthen normative frameworks for the protection of children from violence and abuse, and develop awareness-raising programmes aimed at educating the public about the harmful effects of corporal punishment and enhancing the capacities of educators and the media to promote good practices and more positive methods of child-rearing (Philippines);  115.114 Ensure that legislation is drafted and enacted to prohibit all corporal punishment of children, including in the home (Sweden); 115.115 Legally prohibit the abhorrent practice of corporal punishment of children and adopt an integral law on children, which compiles the provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of));  115.116 Explicitly prohibit in national legislation corporal punishment in all settings, including at home (Austria);  115.117 Take appropriate measures to prevent the forced labour of children in the country (Azerbaijan);  115.118 Adopt a comprehensive legal framework on the rights of the children aiming also at completely outlawing the violence against children (Romania);  115.119 Intensify its work to provide specialized training for investigators, prosecutors and judges in applying the human trafficking statute (Norway);  115.120 Further provide protection to victims of trafficking in human beings, on the basis of a human rights-based approach, and ensure that they are systematically informed of the possibility of a recovery and reflection period (Republic of Moldova);  115.121 Step up efforts to combat trafficking in human beings, including broadening international cooperation on this matter (Russian Federation);  115.122 Combat trafficking, punish perpetrators and compensate and rehabilitate victims (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 115.123 Further strengthen the steps taken in regard to trafficking, particularly in reference to women and children (Afghanistan);  115.124 Continue the efforts directed towards combating trafficking in human beings (Armenia); continue its efforts to combat trafficking in persons, especially women and children, by prosecuting the perpetrators (Costa Rica); take effective measures to prevent trafficking in persons, including women and children (Uzbekistan); combat trafficking in persons, especially in women and children, as well as prosecuting and investigating all perpetrators of these crimes (Azerbaijan);  115.125 Invest in the human and financial resources of the secretariat of the Working Group and the national coordinator dealing with trafficking in human beings so that they can effectively carry out the full range of tasks within their mandate (Czech Republic);  115.126 Redouble its efforts regarding trafficking, with a special focus on trafficking in children (India); 115.127 Take appropriate steps to ensure the effectiveness of its Inter-Ministerial Working Group for Combating Trafficking in Human Beings and of the national coordinator on human trafficking and continue to improve public awareness of this issue (Indonesia); 115.128 Increase the efficiency of court case management, thereby ensuring access to trial without undue delay (United States of America); 115.129 Adopt a professional code of conduct for judges and prosecutors (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of));  115.130 Address the lack of special provisions for children in the Slovenian criminal code and bring its juvenile justice system fully into compliance with international standards (Poland); 115.131 Provide protection to the family as the basic and fundamental unity of the society (Egypt);  115.132 Bring its national legislation fully in line with international standards on freedom of expression by decriminalizing defamation in domestic law (Estonia);  115.133 Consider the ratification of ILO Convention 189 concerning decent work for domestic workers (Nicaragua);  115.134 Enact and fully implement the necessary laws to ensure protection against interference in the establishment, functioning, and administration of worker organizations, consistent with the recommendations of ILO (United States of America);  115.135 Improve the social protection and living conditions of the most vulnerable groups of the population (Algeria);  115.136 Apply more effective actions to face the negative effects of the economic crisis on the population (Cuba); 115.137 Continue its positive efforts in reducing the numbers of persons at risk of poverty or social exclusion by 2020 (Malaysia);  115.138 Provide legal protection against forced evictions (Nigeria);  115.139 Implement recommendations by the Special Rapporteur on the rights to water and sanitation regarding access to water for Roma (Israel);  115.140 Continue to take measures in order to guarantee universal access to safe drinking water and sanitation (Portugal);  115.141 Accelerate its efforts to finalize the national mental health programme, with the aim of reducing the suicide rate (Costa Rica);  115.142 Consider appropriate means to reach out to achieve universal access to health services and consider expanding the coverage of health services under the compulsory health insurance schemes to include appropriate secondary and tertiary services (Thailand);  115.143 Ensure that Slovenia’s facilities regarding the compulsory health insurance scheme are available at the secondary and tertiary levels (Nigeria);  115.144 Provide further resources for the preservation of the languages and culture of national communities, including the German-speaking community, which has for a very long time formed an important part of Slovene society (Austria);  115.145 Allocate sufficient resources to promote the rights of persons with disabilities (Viet Nam);  115.146 Continue to strengthen the protection of persons with disabilities through increasing employment opportunities to fundamentally improve their living conditions (China);  115.147 Review the current practice of participatory rights of persons with disabilities in elections, with the aim of identifying the necessary changes in consultation with relevant stakeholders, and implementing measures to ensure the voting rights of persons with disabilities (Hungary);  115.148 Continue improving the accessibility to transport and infrastructure for persons with disabilities (Spain); 115.149 Ensure the full enjoyment of the political, civil, economic and social rights of “erased” people, including health, social security, education and employment, by regulating the status of the remaining “erased” persons and providing adequate reparation to those affected (Ireland);  115.150 Implement the recommendations accepted by Slovenia during its first UPR on the subject of discrimination against Roma (Israel);  115.151 Continue to devote great attention to the effective implementation of the existing legislative framework on the use of the minority languages (Italy);  115.152 Adopt the necessary measures in order to better comply with the recommendations on the use of minority languages released by the Council of Europe, with particular reference to the rights of the autochthonous Italian minority (Italy);  115.153 Continue strengthening the institutional framework for the promotion and protection of minority rights in the country (Montenegro);  115.154 Take all necessary measures to ensure equal, legal and fair treatment of minorities, including Roma (Netherlands);  115.155 Continued efforts in addressing and protecting the rights of ethnic minorities, including in particular the situation of Roma living in Slovenia (New Zealand);  115.156 Reconsider the grounds for recognizing national minority status (Serbia);  115.157 Consider including in future censuses a question on national ethnicity, so as to determine the different ethnic groups living in Slovenia (Serbia);  115.158 Continue increasing the allocation of additional resources to improve the living conditions of the Roma population in the informal settlements, by strengthening their security of tenancy and ensuring the human right to drinking water and sanitation and access to electricity (Spain);  115.159 Involve Romani organizations and communities in the development and implementation of the strategy for Roma inclusion (United States of America);  115.160 Continue working to safeguard the human rights of the minorities in the country (Guatemala);  115.161 Regularize the status of all erased persons of origin from other former Yugoslavian republics (Sierra Leone);  115.162 Take additional measures to tackle the problem of assimilation and to reduce the gap that exists between the legislative framework and its implementation with regard to the use of minority languages in public services (Hungary);  115.163 Establish conventions that will guarantee the non-violation of migrants’ rights (Nigeria). 116. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English only]   Composition of the delegation The delegation of Slovenia was headed by H.E. Mr. Goran Klemen.i., Minister of Justice and composed of the following members: • H.E. Mr. Bogdan Benko, Ambassador, State Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Deputy Head of Delegation; • Mr. Stanko Baluh, Acting Director, Office of the Government of the Republic of Slovenia for National Minorities; • Ms. Ru.ica Bo.ki., Acting Director-General, Family Affairs Directorate, Ministry of Labour, Family, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities; • Ms. Nina Gregori, Acting Director-General, Internal Administrative Affairs, Migration and Naturalization Directorate, Ministry of the Interior; • Mr. Sa.o Gazdi., Secretary, Head of the Cultural Diversity and Human Rights Service, Ministry of Culture; • Mr. Ivo Holc, Police Councillor, Ministry of the Interior; • Ms. Eva Tomi., Minister Plenipotentiary, Head of Human Rights Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Nadja .obal, Secretary, Ministry of Health; • Mr. Sandi .urin, Undersecretary, National Coordinator for Fight against Trafficking in Persons, Ministry of the Interior; • Ms. Dragica Iskrenovi., Secretary, EU Coordination and International Affairs Service, Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Food; • Ms. Jana Lov.in, Secretary, Social Affairs Directorate, Ministry of Labour, Family, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities; • Ms. Breda Buni., Undersecretary, Ministry of Defence; • Ms. Erika Rustja, Undersecretary, Ministry of Education, Science and Sport; • Mr. Zoran Skubic, Undersecretary, Ministry of Justice; • Ms. Karmen .terbenc, Senior Adviser II, Labour market and Employment Directorate, Ministry of Labour, Family, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities; • Ms. Nina Ban Zlatev, Senior Adviser, Coordinator for International Cooperation, Ministry of Justice; • Ms. Polona Mal Bitenc, Attaché, Human Rights Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • H.E. Mr. Vojislav .uc, Ambassador, Permanent Representative of the Republic of Slovenia to the United Nations Office and other international organizations at Geneva; • Ms. .pela Ko.ir, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Slovenia to the United Nations Office and other international organizations at Geneva; • Ms. Ur.ka .as Svetek, Second Secretary, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Slovenia to the United Nations Office and other international organizations at Geneva.     