Distr.: General 4 April 2014 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-sixth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Uruguay * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.14-12959 *1412959* 
Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–122 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–22 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 23–122 5 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 123–126 14 
III. Voluntary pledges and commitments...................................................................... 127 25  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 26 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its eighteenth session from 27 January to 7 February 2014. The review of Uruguay was held at the 5th meeting, on 29 January 2014. The delegation of Uruguay was headed by Homero Guerrero, Secretary of the Presidency (Minister). At its 10th meeting, held on 31 January 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on Uruguay. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Uruguay: Burkina Faso, Chile and France. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Uruguay: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/URY/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/URY/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/URY/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by the Czech Republic, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Uruguay through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR). Summaries of additional questions posed during the interactive dialogue by Canada, Finland, Guatemala, Hungary, Italy, Montenegro, Morocco, Portugal and the United Arab Emirates are to be found in section I.B of the present report. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The head of the delegation of Uruguay reiterated the State’s commitment to democracy, to human rights and to the multilateral system. He noted that Uruguay had ratified all fundamental treaties for the protection of human rights and the optional protocols thereto. It cooperated with human rights mechanisms and had extended an open invitation to rapporteurs, experts and all other Human Rights Council special procedures, and those of the inter-American system, to visit the country. 6. The delegation referred to the context in which Uruguay had been protecting human rights in the previous decade, which had been marked by the economic crisis of 2001 and 2002, the worst ever suffered by Uruguay. Unemployment and the deterioration of socioeconomic conditions had generated a serious risk of social and family disintegration, the marginalization of a significant number of Uruguayans and an increase in poverty and extreme poverty, as well as a considerable increase in emigration, in particular among young people. 7. That situation constituted one of the biggest threats to the enjoyment of human rights, in particular economic and social rights. The consequences of the crisis had been tackled as a national emergency, through the National Assistance Plan for Social Emergency Plan (PANES), to counteract the threats posed by extreme poverty and marginalization. Two years after its implementation, the Plan had been replaced by the Equity Plan. Legislative and institutional instruments to protect economic, social and cultural rights, as well as civil and political rights, had also been strengthened. 8. Uruguay had also addressed with determination the debt that the society held vis-à.vis its recent past and with the victims of the serious violations of human rights that had been committed during the military dictatorship, by taking measures to allow the investigation, trial and conviction of persons responsible for those crimes. 9. The delegation referred to eight aspects, outlined below, that were illustrative of the efforts made by Uruguay to improve the quality of its human rights policies, norms and institutions.  10. Strengthening of the normative and institutional human rights framework. Efforts in that area included the establishment of the Secretariat for Human Rights of the Presidency of the Republic; a secretariat for the serious violations of human rights under the dictatorship; and a national human rights institution, created by law, which was in the process of being accredited by the International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights.  11. Health, education and housing. Those areas received special attention in public policies. Between 2005 and 2008 the public education budget had been increased and the General Law on Education had been passed. However, high dropout and repetition rates in secondary education were a problem. Uruguay continued to implement health-care reform, building an integrated system that would achieve universal coverage. 12. Equality. Progress had been made in the implementation of equality policies and measures to prevent all forms of discrimination. 13. Measures to combat racial discrimination. Tools for the development of policies that took into consideration racial equity had been developed. In 2013 the Government adopted a law that provided that affirmative action in public and private spheres targeted at people of African descent was in the public interest and that reserved 8 per cent of vacant public positions for that group of the population. 14. Employment policies. The combination of economic policy measures and specific programmes aimed at the insertion of unemployed persons in the labour market had reduced unemployment to a historically low level. Improvements relating to income redistribution had been made when measures aimed at improving the rights of workers were being implemented, through the strengthening of laws relating to the protection of specific, more vulnerable groups, such as the Law on Domestic Workers and rural workers, and the establishment of salary councils and tripartite negotiation. 15. Combating poverty and extreme poverty. Poverty rates had dropped from 30 to 12.4 per cent, and the extreme poverty rate, which had reached 5 per cent towards the end of the crisis in 2002, was currently below 1 per cent. The objective of the Government continued to be the eradication of extreme poverty. 16. Reforms in the penitentiary system. Conditions had been improved, in accordance with recommendations made by the United Nations Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, who had visited the country. The problem of overcrowding had been tackled with determination in detention centres, with significant improvements; the delegation was thus able to announce that overcrowding would be eliminated by mid-2014. 17. Investigation and trial of crimes committed during the military regime in the country’s recent past. The inaction that had characterized the State during the period in which Law No. 15.848 of 1986, known as the Law on the Expiry of the Punitive Claims of the State, had been enforced, was over. In 2005, the paradigm of impunity had shifted when new claims were considered as being beyond the scope of the Expiry Law, and the administrative acts that had provided that the Law was applicable to such claims were revoked. In 2011, the punitive claims of the State that had been deemed to have expired under Law No. 15.848 were re-established pursuant to Law No. 18.831, thus restoring the competence of the judiciary over those cases. At the same time, the State accepted responsibility for the cases of human rights violations that had resulted from State terrorism and repressive regional coordination through Operation Condor. 18. The path towards the re-establishment of truth, the full operation of justice and the punishment of crimes had not been free from difficulties. In 2013, the Supreme Court of Justice had declared two articles of Law 18.831 to be unconstitutional. Those articles had provided that no period of limitation or expiry would apply between 22 December 1986 and the entry into force of that law in October 2011 in respect of grave violations of human rights committed during the civil-military dictatorship, and that such offences constituted crimes against humanity in accordance with international treaties to which Uruguay was a party. 19. While those two articles had been declared unconstitutional with respect to some specific cases, the Supreme Court considered that the law that had introduced the crime of enforced disappearance must not be applied retroactively to cases of enforced disappearance carried out during the military dictatorship, therefore allowing the statute of limitations to apply in those cases. Trials that were currently under way in various courts in Uruguay regarding serious human rights violations, many of them involving enforced disappearances, had continued, although they now faced different positions regarding the imprescriptible nature of the crime of forced disappearance. 20. The Government of Uruguay, for judicial and ethical reasons, wished to continue on the path of truth and justice; the delegation reaffirmed the Government’s commitment to completely fulfilling its international obligations. 21. The delegation acknowledged that there were still areas where further improvements were needed and which required greater resource mobilization and the implementation of new tools. It highlighted the important role of civil society. 22. The delegation referred to the 44 voluntary pledges and commitments set out in the national report, which were targeted at strengthening the protection of human rights in the country. It welcomed contributions that might help Uruguay to improve the quality of its policies and the efficiency of its institutions for the protection of human rights. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 23. During the interactive dialogue, 81 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. All written statements of the delegations, to be checked against delivery on the United Nations webcast archives,1 are posted on the extranet of the Human Rights Council when available.2 1 http://webtv.un.org/meetings-events/human-rights-council/universal-periodic-review/18th.upr/watch/uruguay-review-18th-session-of-universal-periodic-review/3122325213001. 
2 https://extranet.ohchr.org/sites/upr/Sessions/18session/Uruguay/Pages/default.aspx. 
24. Bhutan commended Uruguay for having implemented the recommendations resulting from the first review. It noted the positive measures taken, inter alia, to enhance the rights of women and children through national strategies.  25. The Plurinational State of Bolivia recognized the progress achieved since the first UPR cycle, especially in education, the protection of women’s rights and the fight against discrimination. 26. Botswana commended the efforts made by Uruguay, in particular those in the areas of children’s rights, sexual exploitation of children and education. 27. Brazil expressed its appreciation of the steps taken to promote racial equality and of the adoption of legislation permitting same-sex marriage. It noted the significant reduction in the rates of poverty and extreme poverty over the past few years. 28. Burkina Faso highlighted the progress Uruguay had made on the rights of the child and women’s rights and commended the measures taken to improve prison conditions and to reduce poverty. 29. Canada requested information on the measures that Uruguay planned to take to improve prison conditions. It expressed hope that the national human rights institution would be adequately funded. 30. Chad referred to the progress made, notably the State’s accession to the UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education and its ratification of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, as well as efforts towards the ratification of International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention No. 169 (1989) concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries. 31. Chile congratulated Uruguay for its progress in implementing national plans and programmes to promote and protect all human rights, and expressed its appreciation of the country’s commitment to the universal human rights protection mechanisms. 32. China expressed appreciation for several measures, including those taken to eliminate poverty, to reform the prison system and to promote gender equality and the rights of women, children’s rights and the rights of persons with disabilities. 33. Colombia offered to share its experience with Uruguay in the areas of integrating human rights and gender perspectives in social policies and of follow-up to UPR recommendations. 34. Côte d’Ivoire welcomed the implementation of effective measures aimed at reducing the number of street children, promoting education, supporting families in extreme poverty, combating domestic violence and addressing inhuman treatment in detention centres. 35. Cuba referred to the achievements and political will of Uruguay in the fight against poverty. It highlighted for special recognition the country’s education programmes and the increase in resources for those programmes. 36. Cyprus commended efforts to align national legislation with international standards. It referred to reports of difficulties encountered in the response to violence against women, gender inequalities in the labour market and gender stereotypes, despite the progress made in those areas. 37. Ecuador highlighted the establishment of the national human rights institution and the implementation of the Plan of Action for the National Strategy for Children and Adolescents and the National Plan of Action for the Eradication of Sexual Exploitation of Children and Adolescents. 38. Egypt noted the reiteration by Uruguay of its commitment to the UPR process, observing that Uruguay had accepted all the recommendations made during its first review and had submitted its midterm report. 39. Estonia noted progress regarding women’s rights, the juvenile justice system, human trafficking and poverty reduction, and encouraged Uruguay to make further efforts in those areas. It acknowledged the State’s anti-corruption efforts and its commitment to safeguarding freedom of expression. 40. Finland asked the delegation to provide more details on the treatment of juveniles in the justice system and the implementation of the five programmes under the System of Criminal Liability for Adolescents (SIRPA) mentioned in the national report. 41. France welcomed the State’s commitment to protecting human rights, efforts it had made to implement the accepted recommendations and the establishment of the national human rights institution. 42. Gabon expressed its satisfaction with the annual contributions Uruguay made to OHCHR. It commended the State’s cooperation with special procedures mandate holders and its ratification of many human rights conventions. 43. Germany welcomed the appointment of the members of the board of directors of the national human rights institution. It expressed concern about trafficking in women and girls and deficiencies within the penal system. 44. Ghana commended the progress achieved by Uruguay in the implementation of various recommendations made during the first review cycle. 45. Greece expressed appreciation for the State’s efforts to implement most of the recommendations of the first cycle. It welcomed positive developments, in particular regarding women’s rights, prison conditions and the rights of the child. 46. Guatemala commended Uruguay on its human rights record and requested it to provide information in due course on the results of the consultations to be carried out with respect to the development of a draft plan of action for the National Plan against Racism and Discrimination, and on the possibility of ratifying ILO Convention No. 169. 47. Honduras highlighted important efforts made by Uruguay, including in the development of legislation and its institutional framework and the presentation of a midterm report since the first review. 48. Hungary expressed concern at detention conditions. It asked for additional information on the comprehensive law and the national plan that were being developed to combat trafficking. 49. Indonesia underscored the firm commitment of Uruguay to human rights, in particular its efforts to promote economic, social and cultural rights, including those aimed at combating poverty, fostering social inclusion and promoting the right to education for all. 50. The Islamic Republic of Iran welcomed the decision to accede to the UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education, and the strengthening of social policies on children and adolescents. 51. Ireland expressed its appreciation for the wide range of voluntary pledges made by Uruguay, including those regarding gender-based violence. It raised concerns about reports of domestic violence and the prevalence of preventive and pretrial detention. 52. Israel commended the efforts by Uruguay to improve the protection of human rights and congratulated the State on its ratification of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. 53. Italy asked about the measures Uruguay planned to take to further improve prison conditions, and requested details on the strategy aimed at prosecuting perpetrators of the crime of human trafficking. 54. Jordan commended Uruguay for its efforts, in particular those that had resulted in its accession to the UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education, its ratification of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the establishment of the national human rights institution. 55. Kazakhstan acknowledged the measures taken to enhance the enjoyment of human rights, especially in the areas of children’s and women’s rights, education and combating poverty. It welcomed the establishment of the national human rights institution. 56. Kyrgyzstan noted the establishment of specialized courts and prosecutors to address organized crime and human trafficking, as well as other decisive steps taken as part of the judicial reform. 57. Malaysia expressed its appreciation for the update on the significant progress made in implementing recommendations made in the first review. It was encouraged by the voluntary pledges and commitments outlined in the national report. 58. Maldives took positive note of the Government’s efforts to address the plight of children in vulnerable situations and encouraged Uruguay to make further improvements in the area of domestic violence. 59. Mali noted the social and economic development that Uruguay had achieved, and the numerous initiatives it had carried out to better implement the accepted recommendations. 60. Mexico welcomed the establishment of the Inter-Institutional Commission for the Preparation of Reports to the Universal Periodic Review Mechanism and the Treaty Bodies and the adoption of maternity legislation. 61. Montenegro asked Uruguay to provide more details on institutional improvements relating to the monitoring of the implementation of recommendations from human rights bodies and UPR, and on measures to improve the position of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) persons. 62. Morocco asked about the content of the National Strategy for Children and Adolescents 2010–2030. It welcomed the initiatives aimed at protecting the rights of minors in prisons. 63. Namibia expressed appreciation for the efforts made by Uruguay to reduce poverty and to combat the sexual exploitation and trafficking of children. It also highlighted the enactment of legislation for the protection of persons with disabilities. 64. The Netherlands praised the adoption of the Equal Marriage Law and underscored the importance of it being followed by awareness-raising programmes to combat discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity. 65. Nicaragua recognized the progress made by Uruguay in protecting human rights, including the development of the institutional framework to address social issues such as child labour, juvenile justice, commercial sexual exploitation of children and adolescents, and children living on the street. 66. Norway welcomed the State’s efforts to end impunity and expressed concern at, inter alia, the large number of reported cases of violence against women and the low participation of women in decision-making bodies. 67. Oman commended the educational measures implemented and the procedures for combating trafficking in persons. It welcomed the adoption of strategies for the implementation of public policies on children and adolescents for the period 2010–2030. 68. Pakistan urged Uruguay to take the necessary measures in the areas of improving access to justice and eliminating racial discrimination. It shared the concerns of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women regarding the unequal treatment of people of African descent. 69. Paraguay highlighted the State’s commitment to the treaty bodies and commended its efforts to combat the commercial sexual exploitation of children and adolescents. 70. Peru acknowledged the progress made by Uruguay, in particular the establishment of the national human rights institution; the adoption of legislation on reparations for discrimination against persons of African descent and legislation on persons with disabilities; and the reduction of poverty. 71. The Philippines acknowledged the voluntary commitments included in the national report of Uruguay. It welcomed the positive developments in women’s rights and the efforts to combat trafficking in persons. 72. Portugal asked how Uruguay was assessing the impact of measures regarding the rights of the child, and also asked what measures, in addition to improving budget allocation, were being taken to improve the public education system at the secondary level. 73. The Republic of Moldova welcomed the National Strategy for Children and Adolescents 2010–2030 and the ongoing efforts to combat the sexual exploitation of children and child labour. 74. Tunisia commended the State for its ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, and for the establishment of the national human rights institution. It noted the legislative progress made in combating racial discrimination, and progress achieved in the area of gender equality. 75. The Russian Federation noted the establishment of the national human rights institution, charged with, inter alia, combating and preventing torture, investigating crimes committed under the dictatorship, prosecuting war criminals and searching for disappeared persons. 76. Senegal noted important progress in implementing recommendations, including with respect to children’s rights and combating domestic violence, and positive action in realizing economic, social and cultural rights. 77. Serbia suggested that Uruguay examine the institutional and judicial background underlying the overcrowding in prisons and take the necessary measures and implement appropriate policies to alleviate that situation. 78. Singapore noted the progress that had been made since the previous review of Uruguay, in particular regarding the protection of women against domestic violence and combating trafficking. It also noted efforts to improve the well-being of children and to protect them from being exploited. 79. Slovenia observed that the law passed in 2013 decriminalizing abortion during the first trimester of pregnancy marked a significant development in protecting women’s rights. It remained concerned at the high incidence of domestic violence. 80. Somalia commended Uruguay on the progress made since its previous review and on the presentation of a midterm progress report. 81. Spain commended Uruguay for its recent recognition of homosexual marriage and on advances in addressing gender violence, especially regarding the access of victims to specialized justice. 82. Sri Lanka took positive note of the Ceibal Plan, action taken to strengthen social policies concerning children and adolescents, and efforts to improve access to and the quality of education. 83. The State of Palestine commended Uruguay for its commitment to the UPR mechanism and for its efforts to guarantee economic, social and cultural rights. It encouraged Uruguay to continue to promote the harmonization of those rights in its domestic legislation. 84. Sweden, referring to a report of the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, highlighted the efforts Uruguay had made to improve the situation in prisons, but noted that profound judicial and institutional reforms were required.  85. Thailand commended Uruguay for the progress made in the implementation of recommendations from its first review, in particular regarding the establishment of the national human rights institution. 86. Togo commended the institutional and legal progress made by Uruguay. It expressed satisfaction that the social policies undertaken by the State had led to a remarkable reduction in poverty and extreme poverty. 87. Trinidad and Tobago encouraged Uruguay to continue all its efforts to eradicate poverty and hunger. It noted with satisfaction that Uruguay had taken stringent measures aimed at reducing domestic violence. 88. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland observed with satisfaction that, since the State’s previous review, a number of recommendations had been reflected in its legislation and human rights structures. It welcomed the establishment of the national human rights institution. 89. Turkey commended Uruguay for its implementation of recommendations made during the first review, notably its accession to the UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education and its ratification of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. 90. Turkmenistan welcomed the establishment of the Inter-Institutional Commission for the Preparation of Reports to the Universal Periodic Review Mechanism and the Treaty Bodies, charged with following up on recommendations. 91. The United Arab Emirates noted with appreciation the measures taken to protect children and adolescents. It asked about the primary measures Uruguay planned to take to combat the trafficking in and smuggling of children.  92. Romania expressed its appreciation for the State’s commitment to further promoting the exercise of human rights by citizens, and its continued cooperation with the United Nations human rights mechanisms. 93. The United States of America encouraged Uruguay to take additional measures to ensure that alleged trafficking offenders were prosecuted, and noted the lack of a comprehensive national plan to eliminate the worst forms of child labour. 94. Uzbekistan noted various legal and institutional measures taken by the State since its first review, including its accession to the UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education and its ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. 95. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela highlighted with appreciation the efforts made by Uruguay to eradicate poverty and the attention paid by the State to issues regarding children and adolescents living on the streets and child labour. 96. Viet Nam congratulated Uruguay for its achievements in human rights, including the establishment of the national human rights institution. 97. Yemen welcomed the progress and achievements made by Uruguay, including its ratification of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and its submission of reports to several treaty bodies. 98. Algeria commended the progress made by Uruguay since its first review, and the participatory approach it had adopted for the elaboration of the national report. Algeria highlighted the various legislative and institutional reforms undertaken by the State and its promotion of economic, social and cultural rights. 99. Angola welcomed the efforts regarding children, with the establishment of the System of Criminal Liability for Adolescents, and the political and legal reforms which had allowed the creation of specialized jurisdictions in the area of domestic and family violence. 100. Argentina highlighted the country’s institutional strengthening, in particular the establishment of, inter alia, the national human rights institution, and noted the State’s incorporation of a human rights approach in social policies. 101. Armenia expressed its appreciation for the State’s policy of tolerance towards and engagement with national and religious minorities. It welcomed the establishment of the national human rights institution, as well as the efforts and programmes undertaken in the field of education. 102. Australia acknowledged the State’s efforts to strengthen its institutional framework for the protection of human rights. It commended the adoption of legislation that recognized the sexual and reproductive health rights of women. 103. Azerbaijan noted the institutional and legal reforms undertaken for the promotion and protection of human rights. It also noted concerns expressed by United Nations treaty bodies relating to inequalities between men and women. 104. Bangladesh commended progress in institutional strengthening, in the addressing of child labour and in the health sector. It expressed concern at the persistent incidents of racial discrimination. 105. The delegation responded to questions received in advance and additional comments by grouping responses.  106. Ambassador Laura Dupuy said that Uruguay had defined trafficking in persons as a crime, establishing that age, with respect to child or adolescent victims, and disability constituted aggravating circumstances. The problem was being addressed through awareness-raising campaigns and training for public officials. Coordination took place at the inter-institutional level. A decree regarding tourism operators had been issued. The wider social policies targeting children and teenagers, including those aimed at combating domestic violence, eliminating poverty and social exclusion and promoting sexual education, served as the framework for reducing vulnerability. The law regulating domestic labour provided for the inspection of private residences, including searches with police involvement through judicial authorization. Inspections were being broadened in respect of child labour throughout the country and the various risks were being assessed. 107. Daniela Payssé, a member of the Uruguayan Parliament, said that, historically, in Uruguay the age for marriage had been 12 years for girls and 14 for boys. Through the adoption of Law No. 19.119 on Equal Marriage, the age for marriage had been raised to 16 years. Uruguay recognized that international standards set the age at 18 years; the State had a strong will to align its legislation with international standards.  108. Andrés Scagliola, Director of Social Policy in the Ministry of Social Development, indicated that Uruguay was experiencing a sustained reduction in poverty, driven largely by the doubling of social public expenditure between 2005 and 2012 and the redirecting of policies. Government action included the reform of the Comprehensive National Health System, a budgetary increase for education, the new scheme for economic transfers for families in situations of poverty with dependent children, and the extension of the Comprehensive Child and Family Support Centre Plan (CAIF). Uruguay would continue to work on the National Strategy for Children and Adolescents; the objectives of the strategy would extend to 2030.  109. Regarding issues relating to juvenile justice, Ms. Payssé indicated that, in accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, a system of criminal liability had been established that provided the system for juvenile offenders with a socio.educational focus in line with the paradigm of overall protection promoted by the United Nations. The statistics were encouraging in terms of the ratio between the number of minors deprived of their liberty and the number of minors for whom alternative measures had been applied. There was political will to develop the system and provide it with a proper institutional framework. Amendments had also been made to the Code on Children and Adolescents in line with the strong approach taken regarding the strategy for life and living together, including legislative tools, public policies and intervention at the urban level in areas where living together was quite complex. A draft code of criminal responsibility for adolescents had been submitted to the parliament, which would be analysing its content; one benefit of the draft code was that it would replace the inquiry method with an accusatory method that would meet international standards. Much remained to be done, but progress was being made. 110. Responding to a concern raised by Israel about the registration of children and adolescents, Ms. Payssé said that Uruguay issued certificates of live birth by law. Under the system, prior to leaving the health facility in which the birth took place, a newborn was issued not only with a birth certificate but also with an identity number (DNI). As most births took place in health facilities, there was almost no underregistration in Uruguay to speak of; the rate of unregistered births was well below 2 per cent. All registered children were provided with access to the social policies. Moreover, through programmes implemented under the National Institute for Women, it had been possible to reach families who, for whatever reason, had not registered their children. 111. Regarding the participation of women in decision-making roles and their political participation, Uruguay would apply, in the 2014 elections only, a law stipulating that the lists must contain two persons of one gender and one of another, both for representatives and alternates. The implementation by political parties had yet to be seen. 112. Ambassador Ricardo González Arenas, Director-General for Political Affairs in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, responded to a question concerning domestic violence. Numerous measures had progressively been taken to counteract the phenomenon and to develop a legislative framework and institutions that guaranteed human rights, the protection of victims and the prosecution and accountability of the perpetrators of such crimes. 113. Gabriela Fulco, an adviser with the Ministry of the Interior, referred to the concerns raised by several delegations about the prison system. The attention that the previous two governments had paid to the prison system reflected the increased interest in the protection of human rights and respect for the dignity of people deprived of their liberty. One success achieved was the adoption of cross-cutting intervention strategies, which provided a range of responses involving the participation of the Secretary of State and other State bodies. Uruguay had made progress towards the goal of reducing overcrowding by mid-2014; the measures were expected to result in a surplus of places by 2016. Substantial support had been received from the international community through projects that had strengthened the prison reform process overall and the related institutions. Ms. Fulco expressed hope that the action taken over the past four years had been clearly reflected in the presentation she had made and in the additional documents that were being made available to all delegations. Uruguay welcomed the recommendations made by States and the models of good practice that had been shared.  114. Álvaro Garcé said that, as the Parliamentary Commissioner for the Prison System, he could fully confirm that significant reform of the prison system in Uruguay had been under way for eight years, and that the results, in terms of infrastructure and management reform, were already visible. The Office of the Parliamentary Commissioner had been working with the national human rights institution. Questions had been raised about the regulation of habeas corpus, which had existed in the Constitution since 1917. A project that would create an additional mechanism for the protection of detainees was being considered by the House of Representatives. 115. Graciela Jorge, Executive Coordinator, Secretariat for Human Rights of the Presidency, emphasized the commitment of the executive branch to addressing human rights violations which had occurred during the pre-dictatorship and dictatorship periods, from 1968 to 1985. Owing to efforts made since 2000, the forced disappearance of 178 Uruguayans had been recognized by 2014. One clear example of institutional strengthening was the establishment of the Secretariat for Human Rights to address cases from the recent past. The Secretariat, which included university teams, worked daily on historical and anthropological investigations. Anthropological investigations included exploratory surveys to search for the remains of disappeared persons. To date, victims had lodged 204 complaints of human rights violations from the recent past with the country’s judicial headquarters. Uruguay was also collaborating with judicial bodies in Argentina, Chile and Italy. The Secretariat also responded to requests from people who were looking into their origins, namely, people who believed they were the children of disappeared persons. 116. Ambassador Federico Perazza, Director of Human Rights and Humanitarian Law in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, responded to questions on the implementation of the laws on sexual and reproductive rights and on the voluntary termination of pregnancy. The regulation of the laws was coordinated by the Ministry of Public Health, and clearly defined the elements relating to conscientious objection. He recalled that, in recent years, with the implementation of the current law, there had been no cases of maternal death due to unsafe abortions, while previously they had represented 30 per cent of maternal mortality in the country. 117. The national plan of human rights that was being developed was focused on the human rights dimension, but was also cross-cutting, and would also provide a framework for living together. It would soon be presented to the Council of Ministers; there would be a consultation with civil society, and the plan would be fully operational by the end of 2014. 118. The National Plan against Racism and Discrimination, in line with the United Nations model, had expanded the concept of discrimination. The Government hoped to complete it in the second half of 2014 and present it to civil society for consultation, with the expectation that it would be fully operational in 2015. 119. Uruguay was implementing numerous programmes and policies aimed at combating school dropout. 120. Mr. Scagliola indicated that Uruguay was committed to implementing policies of equality with regard to the rights of persons with disabilities. It was making progress in drafting the regulation of a comprehensive law. Progress had also been made in the context of the new National Plan of Access to Justice and Legal Protection for Persons with Disabilities. 121. Regarding the possibility of consular voting, Mr. Guerrero indicated that a working group in the national Parliament was working on that matter. As that would be an electoral law, it would require a two-thirds majority to be passed. 122. The delegation expressed its hope that its answers had been satisfactory, and that they had addressed the concerns of States and civil society. It noted that Uruguay was willing to agree in principle to all the recommendations that were in line with international standards. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations** 123. The recommendations listed below enjoy the support of Uruguay: 123.1. Consider ratifying those international instruments to which it is not yet a party, and which aim to protect the rights of minority groups (Nicaragua); 123.2. Continue incorporating the ratified human rights treaties into national legislation and institutions, with more focus on administration of justice, disparities reduction, employment for the youth and adequate housing and social welfare (Viet Nam); 123.3. Further fulfil the internationally taken obligations as well as join new human rights international instruments (Kazakhstan); 123.4. Consider the adoption of ILO Convention No. 169, in order to ensure the effective protection and promotion of the rights of indigenous peoples, contributing to the recognition of their national identity, particularly the ones of the Charrúa Nation3 (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 123.5. Consider ratifying ILO Convention No. 169 within a reasonable timeframe4 (Gabon); 123.6. Ratify ILO Convention No. 169 on indigenous peoples (Uzbekistan); 123.7. Continue making progress in the efforts needed and consider ratifying ILO Convention No. 1695 (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); ** The conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 123.8. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Montenegro); 123.9. Adopt necessary legislative and administrative measures to guarantee the security of LGBT persons and facilitate their access to justice and legal assistance (Norway); 123.10. Continue making progress in the efforts needed to have a National Human Rights Institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 123.11. Ensure that the National Human Rights Institution and Ombudsman’s Office is sufficiently resourced to effectively discharge its duties and accords with the Paris Principles (Australia); 123.12. Work to obtain the accreditation of the National Human Rights Institution (Burkina Faso); 123.13. Ensure the compliance of the Paris Principles by the National Human Rights Institution (France); 123.14. Maintain the respect for the independence of Uruguay’s National Human Rights Institution and Ombudsman’s Office during the reporting process (Ghana); 123.15. Accredit the National Human Rights Institution and Ombudsman’s Office before the International Coordinating Committee of National Human Rights Institutions (Mexico); 123.16. Accelerate the establishment of a national mechanism for the prevention of torture (Burkina Faso); 123.17. Further strengthen the National Preventive Mechanism under the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment by ensuring its autonomy, allocating necessary resources and developing a plan for its effective implementation (Serbia); 123.18. Proceed with the establishment of a National Preventive Mechanism against Torture in accordance with the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture, ensuring their independence, adequate funding and resources, and the development of a detailed plan for its effective implementation (Spain); 123.19. Sustain the broad consultation methodology including continuing the effective participation of civil society organizations in the work of the Inter-Institutional Commission (Ghana); 123.20. Promote the elaboration and adoption of a national human rights plan (Peru); 123.21. Continue strengthening the national legislation for the prevention, prosecution and reparation of racism and other forms of discrimination, in particular through the adoption of the National Plan against Racism and Discrimination, the strengthening of the Honorary Commission against Racism and Xenophobia, as well as the implementation of awareness-raising campaigns that may lead to cultural changes (Colombia); 123.22. Ensure the effective implementation of the National Plan against Racism and Discrimination (Côte d’Ivoire); 123.23. Continue efforts on adopting the national Plan against Racism and Discrimination (Kazakhstan); 123.24. Complete current initiatives for the adoption of the National Plan against racism and discrimination, in consultation with organizations of persons of African descent and organizations of indigenous peoples (Peru); 123.25. Continue working on the full implementation of the National Plan against Racism and All Forms of Discrimination (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 123.26. Set priorities and adequate resources for the implementation of Uruguay’s voluntary pledges and commitments as stated in its Review Report (Viet Nam); 123.27. Continue to strengthen the effective implementation of its legislation on the rights of women (Romania); 123.28. Continue developing policies and programmes to enhance protection and advancement of women’s rights (Philippines); 123.29. Strengthen the National Women’s Institute through greater prominence and adequate resources (Bangladesh); 123.30. Put in place a monitoring mechanism for the assessment of the situation of the protection of children, and strengthen the capacity of State and private institutions working on children’s rights (Morocco); 123.31. Continue implementing programmes aimed at protecting the rights of the child (Nicaragua); 123.32. Continue its policies on improving the rights of the child (Jordan); 123.33. Continue the efforts to implement the National Strategy for Children and Adolescents 2010-2030 (United Arab Emirates); 123.34. Continue the consolidation of social policies within the framework of the National Strategy for Children and Adolescents to claim the rights of children and adolescents who are in a situation of extreme vulnerability (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 123.35. Consider eventual improvements of the family support policies as well as alternative child care options in order to address the issue, inter alia, of the so-called street children (Serbia); 123.36. Further improve human rights records in the country (Azerbaijan); 123.37. Expedite process for preparation and adoption of national action plan in areas of health and education for equal access to children of African descent (Pakistan); 123.38. Continue paying particular attention to the conditions of vulnerable groups, such as persons with disabilities and indigenous peoples, in particular Afro-descendants (Somalia); 123.39. Continue social programmes aimed at addressing the basic needs of food, education, housing, health and work for vulnerable groups (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 123.40. Continue adopting measures to strengthen institutions in the field of aging (Argentina); 123.41. Encourage racial, ethnic and religious tolerance, especially among young people (Turkmenistan); 123.42. Amend its Penal Code to eliminate language that discriminates against women, in particular the section entitled “Title X”, to ensure respect for rights and to address the impact of the violence suffered by victims of these offences (Canada); 123.43. Continue with its efforts to remove discriminatory norms against women from its legislation (Cyprus); 123.44. Give greater prominence and allocate adequate resources to the implementation of policies that strengthen the State’s institutional gender framework using training courses that promote gender equality (Israel); 123.45. Conduct the reforms to the Civil Code to eradicate discrimination against widows or divorced women (Spain); 123.46. Strengthen measures on combating discrimination against women and eliminate stereotypes of Afro-descendant and indigenous people through awareness-raising campaigns (Azerbaijan); 123.47. Take stronger measures to ensure equal rights and opportunities, regardless of ethnicity and sex (Norway); 123.48. Intensify its fight against discrimination of which people of African descent are victims and take appropriate measures to reduce inequalities affecting them in the areas of employment, housing and education (Gabon); 123.49. Continue making efforts to incorporate an ethno-racial dimension in all plans and programmes aimed combating discrimination (Guatemala); 123.50. Criminalize the dissemination of theories on racial superiority or inferiority and prohibit organizations which promote and incite racial discrimination (Honduras); 123.51. Adopt national legislation to combat offences related to racism and to provide redress for victims of racism and other forms of discrimination (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 123.52. Enact specific legislation to prohibit racism and racial discrimination (Namibia); 123.53. Strengthen legal and policy frameworks and programmes for the promotion and the protection of the rights of people of African Descent, including through promoting the employment of people of African Descent in public administration and private enterprises, and promoting the integration of women of African descent into the labour market (Namibia); 123.54. Take necessary measures to prohibit racial discrimination and adopt a comprehensive anti-discriminatory law (Pakistan); 123.55. Adopt a comprehensive law against discrimination containing provisions that specifically prohibit racism and racial discrimination; qualify as a crime punishable by law, the dissemination of ideas based on racial supremacy or inferiority; and prohibit organizations that promote or incite racial discrimination (Tunisia); 123.56. Adopt a law on prohibition of racism and racial discrimination as well as a relevant/appropriate national action plan in this field (Uzbekistan); 123.57. Criminalize the dissemination of theories of racial superiority or inferiority and prohibit organizations which promote and incite racial discrimination (Bangladesh); 123.58. Strengthen measures to combat discrimination against women and ensure that additional special measures are taken to effectively empower women, in particular, women of African descent (Botswana); 123.59. Strengthen actions on equal opportunities (Burkina Faso); 123.60. Consolidate a human rights and gender perspective in the social policies practice aiming at gender equality in practice (Colombia); 123.61. Take all necessary steps in order to promote equality of women and men in the realms of family, economy and policy (Cyprus); 123.62. Step up efforts to achieve equality and eliminate discrimination against women, afro-descendants and indigenous, and improve their access to education, housing, health and employment (Ecuador); 123.63. Raise the minimum age of marriage to 18 years for both sexes (Estonia); 123.64. Continue to protect the rights of its children, by implementing successful programs that ensure 100% access to birth registration, as well as strengthening the legal framework that guarantees the universal right to education and promote emphasis on care, access and opportunities6 (Israel); 123.65. Continue innovative education programs recognizing sexual diversity and adopt a health policy that further enhances awareness on and sensitizing of sexual orientation and gender issues amongst health personnel (Netherlands); 123.66. Ensure equality of men and women in practice and bring domestic legislation into line with the recommendations of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (Russian Federation); 123.67. Take all necessary policing and other measures to prevent and provide protection against all forms of discrimination, violence and harassment related to sexual and gender identity, and ensure that perpetration of such violence is vigorously investigated and that perpetrators are held accountable (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 123.68. Take effective measures to ensure de facto equality of all women (Uzbekistan); 123.69. Continue to give greater prominence to gender equality and ensure the National Women’s Institute is adequately resourced (Australia); 123.70. Eliminate child marriages and adopt 18 as a minimum age for marriage for both sexes (Azerbaijan); 123.71. Continue the investigation of human rights violations, particularly enforced disappearances (Argentina); 123.72. Continue efforts to improve detention conditions, particularly through the fight against prison overcrowding (France); 123.73. Continue efforts to further improve prison conditions and share relevant best practices with the Human Rights Council (Greece); 123.74. Address overcrowding in prison systems and poor prison conditions, especially to ensure human rights of women prisoners are protected (Maldives); 123.75. Consolidate its national strategy for the reform of the penitentiary system in a manner that guarantees the rehabilitation and the prompt reintegration of minors into the society (Morocco); 123.76. Continue to take steps to improve the penitentiary system (Portugal); 123.77. Take measures to improve the penitentiary system and identify additional resources to solve the problem of prison overcrowding (Russian Federation); 123.78. Continue advancing in the improvement of detention conditions and in the mechanisms of social reintegration of prisoners and in the reform of the criminal justice system (Spain); 123.79. Continue to reform the prison system and look further into ways of reforming the Penal Code to ensure adequate prison conditions and treatment of prisoners (Sweden); 123.80. Continue the reform process to strengthen the institutions of the prison system in order to guarantee respect for the human rights and dignity of persons deprived of liberty (Turkey); 123.81. Increase efforts to address prison overcrowding, antiquated facilities and undue delays in prosecution that have prolonged pre-trial detention (United States of America); 123.82. Conduct comprehensive reform of the penitentiary system (Uzbekistan); 123.83. Address prison overcrowding by reviewing the use of pre-trial detention (Australia); 123.84. Develop more plans to support women prisoners (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 123.85. Apply the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders, or the Bangkok Rules, as part of its efforts to guarantee respect for human rights and dignity of persons deprived of their liberty (Thailand); 123.86. Elaborate and apply alternative penalties to prison incarceration and take all necessary measures to decrease the excessive use of pre-trial detention (Hungary); 123.87. Promote alternative penalties to prison and draw up public policies to foster the rights of persons in prisons (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 123.88. Take steps to reduce the incidence of preventative and pre-trial detention (Ireland); 123.89. Strengthen its efforts to address domestic violence through appropriate public awareness campaigns and by ensuring that women are made aware of their rights (Canada); 123.90. Provide sufficient protection for victims of domestic violence and ensure proper monitoring of the rehabilitation of persons convicted (Canada); 123.91. Continue strengthening the national plan against the scourge of domestic violence, placing emphasis on prevention and awareness-raising of public opinion (Chile); 123.92. Take additional measures to protect women from domestic violence (Cyprus); 123.93. Take further measures in the fight against domestic violence, human trafficking and poverty, especially concerning women and children (Estonia); 123.94. Continue efforts in favour of the rights of women and children and adopt all necessary measures to efficiently combat domestic violence (France); 123.95. Continue its efforts to eradicate domestic violence by putting in place mechanisms to survey the proper implementation of the protocols of action by government agencies and apply appropriate sanctions where such implementation is not in line with the prescribed rules (Hungary); 123.96. Endeavour, in line with its voluntary pledges, to combat gender-based violence by, inter alia, enforcing existing legislation, conducting public awareness campaigns, ensuring psychosocial support and access to shelters for victims, and monitoring rehabilitation of persons convicted (Ireland); 123.97. Promote and protect human rights of women, by strengthening efforts to end domestic violence, and other forms of violence and discrimination against women by implementation of existing laws and awareness programs. (Maldives); 123.98. Intensify prosecution and preventive measures in order to further protect women and to generate greater awareness of gender-based violence (Norway); 123.99. Strengthen public policies regarding violence against women, adopting, among other things, affirmative measures to combat women’s poverty, linked to the unequal distribution between time spent on paid and unpaid work (Paraguay); 123.100. Adopt a comprehensive law to fight violence against women (Tunisia); 123.101. Continue to combat domestic violence and renew the national action plan in this field (Russian Federation); 123.102. Strengthen the mechanisms to protect victims of gender-based violence (Senegal); 123.103. Continue to enhance the protection of women against violence and to promote greater gender equality (Singapore); 123.104. Step up its efforts to prevent domestic violence, including through enforcing existing legislation, continuing its awareness-raising campaigns, as well as through efficiently implementing, and where necessary, introducing new state programmes to protect the victims of domestic violence and to offer them psychological support and access to shelter (Slovenia); 123.105. Strengthen measures to respond to gender-based violence in every sphere of public and private life (Sri Lanka); 123.106. Continue implementing the project “Uruguay, united in putting an end to violence against women, children and adolescents” 2012-2014 (Algeria); 123.107. Reinforce policies already in place aimed at preventing and effectively responding to domestic violence against women, including the protection by the State of the displaced surviving victims (Brazil); 123.108. Strengthen national policies aimed at protecting children and youth against violence, abuses and sexual exploitation (Côte d’Ivoire); 123.109. Continue efforts regarding the rights of the child and welcomed all initiatives relating to street children (Greece); 123.110. Continue unabated its commitment to tackle the problem of sexual exploitation of children and child labour (Italy); 123.111. Strengthen coordination measures to address child labour (Namibia); 123.112. Continue its efforts to eradicate child labour and ensure access to quality education for all children (Singapore); 123.113. Implement a comprehensive assistance programme for children living on the streets, ensuring that they have access to sanitation, education and social security (State of Palestine); 123.114. Continue taking strong measures with a view to fully combating sexual exploitation of children and ensure that the law is strengthened to tackle impunity for these crimes (Sweden); 123.115. Draft and adopt a comprehensive national plan of action to address the worst forms of child labour (United States of America); 123.116. Continue its efforts to develop an action plan to eliminate child labour and to give priority to inclusive education for all (Yemen); 123.117. Continue its efforts in raising awareness about trafficking in persons through comprehensive training programmes for social workers, law enforcement officials and the media (Bhutan); 123.118. Step up measures to combat trafficking of persons and protect the rights of victims, in particular women and children (Ecuador); 123.119. Continue to implement adequate measures to fight trafficking in women and girls for the purpose of sexual exploitation, as well as adequate measures to fight violence against women, including providing assistance and redress for victims of both crimes (Germany); 123.120. Develop a comprehensive, inclusive and holistic national plan of action against trafficking in persons; and examine the possibility of establishing a central organ to deal with trafficking in persons (Honduras); 123.121. Approve a comprehensive law on the fight against human trafficking especially for women (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 123.122. Implement a national plan of action to fight against trafficking of women for sexual exploitation (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 123.123. Continue taking measures on combating trafficking in persons (Kazakhstan); 123.124. Draw up a comprehensive programme to combat trafficking in persons (Kyrgyzstan); 123.125. Provide assistance and redress to victims of trafficking in persons (Kyrgyzstan); 123.126. Launch campaigns to raise public awareness on trafficking in persons (Kyrgyzstan); 123.127. Adopt a national action plan to prevent trafficking in persons and assist the victims of this crime (Mexico); 123.128. Increase awareness and training campaigns at national level, to combat the trafficking of women and children, and deepen this topic in school programmes (Morocco); 123.129. Consider stepping up measures to address trafficking vulnerabilities of women and children (Philippines); 123.130. Strengthen institutional mechanisms to address crimes against children, such as trafficking and sexual exploitation of children and adolescents (Sri Lanka); 123.131. Consider the establishment of a central agency to address human trafficking (Trinidad and Tobago); 123.132. Increase efforts to identify and prosecute suspected human traffickers and provide comprehensive services to victims of trafficking (United States of America); 123.133. Enhance initiatives designed to halt the trafficking and sexual exploitation of children and adolescents in the country, particularly through the strengthening of its justice system and the adoption of appropriate legislation on the matter (Brazil); 123.134. Strengthen its efforts to reform its penal system, including seeking alternatives to pre-trial detention and ensuring that its system of juvenile detention is in line with its human rights obligations (Germany); 123.135. Strengthen its efforts to reform its criminal procedure law in order to guarantee a fair and timely legal process (Germany); 123.136. Continue reforms in the system of the law-enforcement agencies and the judicial system (Turkmenistan); 123.137. Further strengthen the justice system, including adopting a specific law to criminalize sexual tourism (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 123.138. Continue its efforts aimed at improving the access of vulnerable populations and groups to the justice system (Angola); 123.139. Ensure proper implementation of the law on reparation for acts of discrimination against people of African descent (Burkina Faso); 123.140. Strengthen plans and programmes for crime prevention and rehabilitation (Chile); 123.141. Consider making additional efforts to facilitate equal access to judicial and administrative remedies for people of African descent and of indigenous origin (Egypt); 123.142. Include access to justice and remedy, as well as psychological support and occupational training, for victims of trafficking to help them regain their lives and reintegrate back into society (Thailand); 123.143. The Executive and Judicial authorities in Uruguay should continue to cooperate to facilitate investigations into serious violations of human rights, including cases of involuntary disappearances that occurred during the era of Operation Condor (Ghana); 123.144. Make a priority of passing a revised penal code (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 123.145. Establish mechanisms for witness protection and access to justice for victims, their families and civil society actors who might be assisting them, as recommended by the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and children (Botswana); 123.146. Continue advancing on the specialization of the juvenile justice system, including the development of an appeals mechanism (Chile); 123.147. Continue developing its juvenile justice system, in terms of both legislation and practice. In particular, continue efforts to ensure that there are adequately trained professionals and adequate infrastructure for adolescents in conflict with the law. Deprivation of liberty should only be used as a measure of last resort and for as short a period as possible (Finland); 123.148. Concerning the deprivation of liberty of minors, develop and prioritize alternative measures allowing the reintegration of the child into the society and only deprive minors of their liberty as a last resort (France); 123.149. Take necessary measures, so as not to allow the lowering of the minimum age of criminal responsibility (Paraguay); 123.150. Strengthen its specialized juvenile justice system and promote alternative measures to deprivation of liberty, with a view to the full reintegration of the child into the society (Republic of Moldova); 123.151. Continue its efforts to give effect to the vote of Uruguayans living abroad (Burkina Faso); 123.152. Continue its efforts to ensure an equal opportunity to participate in the political process for all of its citizens (Indonesia); 123.153. Continue consultations with a view to allowing the Uruguayan diaspora to exercise their right to vote (Senegal); 123.154. Strengthen efforts to ensure better participation of women at all spheres of public life and especially at political level (Greece); 123.155. Adopt measures to increase gender parity in political and public spheres and improve the participation of women in decision-making and public policy development (Netherlands); 123.156. Make permanent the “pilot” requirement to include persons of both sexes in each list of candidates as it will apply to the national and departmental elections of 2014-2015 (Slovenia); 123.157. Ensure gender equality at the workplace (Côte d’Ivoire); 123.158. Take additional measures to promote equality of access to employment (Egypt); 123.159. Continue its efforts in providing equal treatment for men and women in employment (Jordan); 123.160. Continue promoting the right of women, especially rural women and guarantee their equality in employment opportunities (Armenia); 123.161. Continue strengthening on-going measures aimed at improving the living conditions of the whole population of the country (Mali); 123.162. Continue implementing its poverty reduction strategy and protect the rights of vulnerable groups so as to achieve a sustainable socio-economic development (China); 123.163. Continue to take measures to ensure the elimination of poverty (Cuba); 123.164. Continue its efforts on initiatives aimed at enhancing economic growth and improving the living standards in the country (Oman); 123.165. Take further steps to reduce poverty and extreme poverty (Portugal); 123.166. Continue strengthening its economic and social development (Somalia); 123.167. Continue implementing current projects and socio-economic development programmes for the promotion and protection of human rights (Somalia); 123.168. Implement a system to measure progress indicators on economic, social and cultural rights (State of Palestine); 123.169. Step up efforts to reduce poverty by allocating additional resources to individuals and groups of vulnerable populations (Togo); 123.170. Increase its political and financial commitment aimed at ensuring the full development of children and their families (Togo); 123.171. Continue to implement the necessary socio-economic policies to reduce poverty especially among women and children (Trinidad and Tobago); 123.172. Continue implementing comprehensive social assistance programmes, aiming at reducing poverty and inequalities in the distribution of income (Algeria); 123.173. Continue its efforts to reduce poverty and improve living conditions, particularly among vulnerable groups (Australia); 123.174. Provide access to adequate housing, with a focus on assistance to low-income families (Egypt); 123.175. Continue providing access to adequate housing, particularly by assisting low-income families and other disadvantaged individuals and groups (Malaysia); 123.176. Strengthen its efforts in promoting the right to health, including access to a comprehensive health care (Indonesia); 123.177. Step up efforts to improve the quality of education and allocate adequate resources, and address the issue of highschool dropouts (Malaysia); 123.178. Continue the efforts of the Government to ensure the improvement of its educational and health systems, as well as progress on other socio-economic and cultural rights (Cuba); 123.179. Take further structural measures in order to reduce the school dropout rate (Estonia); 123.180. Strengthen measures to reduce repetition and dropout rates and evaluate the outcome of such measures, as well as to continue to fight child poverty and address issues such as street children, child labour and child trafficking and smuggling (Portugal); 123.181. Introduce necessary reforms in the education system for reducing school dropout rates, particularly in secondary education (Republic of Moldova); 123.182. Strengthen efforts to implement the 2008 law on education and the reduction of school dropout rates of children of African descent and indigenous origin (Bangladesh); 123.183. Increase efforts aimed at countering the root causes of early school leaving and the lack of continuity in education (Italy); 123.184. Continue its efforts towards enhancing the access to secondary education, particularly for students from rural areas (Armenia); 123.185. Continue to develop programmes to increase physical accessibility for persons with disabilities and foster their labour inclusion, and in this framework make a specific effort regarding childhood (Spain); 123.186. Ensure the entry into force of the Act on the Comprehensive Protection of Persons with Disabilities (Mexico); 123.187. Consider strengthening the capacity of the ministries responsible for developing a sustainable mining strategy (Egypt). 124. The recommendation below did not enjoy the support of Uruguay: 124.1. Ensure the protection of and right to family life on the premise that family is the natural and fundamental group of society based upon the stable relationship between a man and a woman (Bangladesh). 125. Uruguay rejects the recommendation made by the delegation of Bangladesh. Uruguay effectively protects the family institution, including through laws embodied in the National Constitution on a wide and non-discriminatory basis, rejecting to limit the concept of family on grounds of gender identity, sexual orientation or any other reason, in accordance with our national legislation and the highest international standards on human rights protection. 126. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. III. Voluntary pledges and commitments 127. Reference is made to the voluntary pledges and commitments made in section III of the national report of Uruguay (A/HRC/WG.6/18/URY/1). Annex 
[English/Spanish only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of Uruguay was headed by Doctor Homero Guerrero, Secretario de Presidencia (Ministro) y Jefe de Delegación and composed of the following members: • Señora Laura Dupuy 	Lasserre, Embajadora y Representante Permanente del 
Uruguay ante la Oficina de Naciones Unidas y Organismos Especializados; 
• Embajador Ricardo González Arenas, Director General para Asuntos Políticos del 
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores; 
• Embajador 	Federico Perazza, Director de Derechos Humanos y Derecho 
Humanitario del Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores; 
• Licenciada Graciela Jorge, Coordinadora Ejecutiva de la Secretaría de Derechos 
Humanos de la Presidencia de la República; 
• Psicóloga Gabriela Fulco, Asesora del Ministerio del Interior; • Politólogo	 Andrés Scagliola, Director de Políticas Sociales del Ministerio de 
Desarrollo Social (MIDES); 
• Señora Daniela Payssé, Representante Nacional (Diputada); • Doctor Alvaro Garcé, Comisionado Parlamentario para el Sistema Carcelario; • Señora Dianela Pi, Ministro Consejero; • Señora Cristina González, Ministro Consejero; • Señor Patricio Silva, Secretario de Segunda. 