Distr.: General 2 April 2014 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-sixth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Viet Nam * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.14-12910 *1412910* Contents Paragraphs Page I. Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 II. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–142 3 A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–18 3 B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 19–142 5 III. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 143–144 14  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 28 I. 	Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its eighteenth session from 27 January to 7 February 2014. The review of Viet Nam was held at the 16th meeting on 5 February 2014. The delegation of Viet Nam was headed by Ha Kim Ngoc, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs. At its 18th meeting, held on 7 February 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on Viet Nam. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Viet Nam: Costa Rica, Kazakhstan and Kenya. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Viet Nam: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation given in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/VNM/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/VNM/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/VNM/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, Canada, the Czech Republic, Germany, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, the United States of America and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Viet Nam through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR). II. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The Vietnamese delegation was led by Ha Kim Ngoc, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs, and was composed of 22 representatives from 11 government agencies, namely the Government Office, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Public Security, the Ministry of Labor, War Invalids and Social Affairs, the Ministry of Information and Communications, the Ministry of Planning and Investment, the Government Committee for Religious Affairs, the Committee on Ethnic Minority Affairs, the People’s Supreme Court, and the Mass Communication and Education Department of the Central Committee of the Vietnamese Communist Party. 6. In its first UPR in May 2009, Viet Nam received 123 recommendations from 60 countries, 96 of which were accepted. To date, all accepted recommendations have been implemented in all domains, particularly the development of laws and policies on human rights, poverty reduction, sustainable economic development, social security, employment, education and health care, fundamental freedoms of citizens and the rights of vulnerable groups. 7. It has been the consistent policy of Viet Nam to respect, protect and promote all fundamental human rights and freedoms, and this has constituted the guiding principle for all strategies and policies for national socioeconomic development. Viet Nam has maintained an environment of peace and stability, sustained economic growth and improved material and cultural life. This has created the necessary preconditions for the promotion and protection of human rights in all political, civil, economic, cultural and social domains. 8. On 28 November 2013, the National Assembly adopted a Constitution, which represents a step towards a rule-of-law State and the institutionalization of human rights in conformity with the international human rights norms and instruments to which Viet Nam is a party. Since 2009, 25 key laws have been enacted or amended with a view to better compliance with and exercise of human rights and 41 national socioeconomic development strategies and programmes have been approved and implemented. 9. Viet Nam has strengthened cooperation and engagement with regional and international organizations, in particular the Human Rights Council, thereby making a significant contribution to the cause of human rights. 10. Viet Nam has been recognized internationally as one of the top performers in attaining the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). The economic growth of 5.5–6 per cent from 2009 to 2012 permitted Viet Nam to accomplish the many set targets in labour, employment, health care, education and social security, such as creating 1.5 million new jobs every year, keeping unemployment below 2 per cent, and completing the universalization of primary and secondary education. 11. By the end of 2013, there were a total of 997 print newspapers and 1,084 publications. Nearly 17,000 licensed journalists are working in Viet Nam. Regular Internet users account for 34 per cent of the population. 12. There are 460 associations and social and professional organizations active at the provincial, interprovincial and national levels, as compared with 380 in 2009; 20 business trade union organizations; and over 36,000 associations, unions of associations and clubs at local levels operating in all walks of life. 13. The consistent policy of Viet Nam is to respect, ensure and create enabling conditions for all people to exercise the freedom of religion and belief. There are 8,500 religious and belief-related activities of varying scopes which take place annually throughout the country. 14. In June 2012, Viet Nam signed and ratified the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons. In November 2013, it signed the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment (CAT), which it will ratify, together with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD). Viet Nam has also signed a number of International Labour Organization (ILO) conventions related to labour and employment. 15. Viet Nam presented reports to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination in February 2012 and the Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC) in May 2012. It has submitted reports to the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women; and is in the process of drafting its report for the Human Rights Committee. 16. Viet Nam has received visits from five special procedures, including the Independent Expert on minority issues (July 2010), the Independent Expert on extreme poverty and human rights (August 2010), the Independent Expert on the effects of foreign debt and other related international financial obligations of States on the full enjoyment of all human rights, particularly economic, social and cultural rights (March 2011), the Special Rapporteur on the right to health (December 2011) and the Independent Expert in the field of cultural rights (November 2013) and has extended invitations to three others. The Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief is scheduled to visit Viet Nam in August 2014.  17. At the regional level, Viet Nam has made a remarkable contribution to the establishment and operation of the Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), and its Commission on Protecting and Promoting the Rights of Women and Children. Notably, Viet Nam joined with other ASEAN countries in developing and adopting the ASEAN Human Rights Declaration in November 2011.  18. Viet Nam still faces many challenges, including the consequences of wars, natural disasters, pandemics and climate change, as well as the negative impacts of globalization. There is still a lack of uniformity in the legal system, together with overlapping legislation. The Government is aware of the difficulties and challenges and will continue to improve the legal system on the basis of the 2013 Constitution. National programmes have been implemented in specific areas to make the social security system more accessible to disadvantaged groups. At the international level, Viet Nam advocates continued efforts to enhance cooperation with all countries, United Nations mechanisms and specialized agencies and participates actively and responsively in the work of the Human Rights Council. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 19. During the interactive dialogue, 106 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 20. Norway recognized progress made towards achieving the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) standards and a more vibrant and open civil society. It noted the importance of freedom of expression and the role of the media in socioeconomic development. 21. Oman welcomed improvement in educational, health-care and social welfare services, and programmes aimed at developing the labour market, reducing poverty and providing adequate housing. 22. Pakistan commended accession to several international human rights instruments, cooperation with the Human Rights Council special procedures, and political and economic reforms undertaken to meet international human rights obligations.  23. Thailand noted the new Constitution, which would create a stronger human rights foundation, and the adoption of a national action plan to build a safer living environment for children. It encouraged the establishment of a national human rights institution. 24. Poland commended the ongoing efforts to comply with international obligations. It remained concerned about the situation of human rights defenders, and religious and ethnic minorities. 25. Portugal welcomed the cooperation with special procedures, and the death penalty reforms. It noted efforts to improve socioeconomic conditions, which had resulted in a reduction in poverty and greater access to education and health care.  26. The Republic of Korea acknowledged efforts to strengthen human rights legislation and policies by accelerating amendments to the Constitution. It commended the signature of CRPD and CAT, and encouraged their ratification. 27. The Republic of Moldova asked what services were provided to child victims of commercial sexual exploitation. It shared treaty body views on the need to expedite judicial reform and strengthen the juvenile justice system. 28. Hungary noted improvements in human rights education. It was concerned about recent legislation restricting freedom of expression and on the prosecution of writers, journalists, bloggers and human rights defenders. 29. The Russian Federation commended the adoption of amendments to the Penal Code, and welcomed improvements in social welfare and broader access to education and health care. 30. Senegal noted progress in ensuring the economic, social and cultural rights of the Vietnamese people, particularly measures to promote socioeconomic development and the rights of children and older persons. 31. Serbia welcomed legislative reforms and the ongoing development of a legal framework in compliance with international human rights instruments to improve the effectiveness of the rule of law and the functioning of institutions.  32. Singapore noted the implementation of national programmes to improve access to education, housing and health-care services. It also noted progress in reducing poverty and infant mortality and promoting religious harmony. 33. Slovakia commended the cooperation with special procedures and the adoption of legislation on socioeconomic rights. It invited the Government to take legislative and institutional measures to ensure that freedom of expression and assembly were in line with international standards.  34. Slovenia commended initiatives to improve children’s rights, but remained concerned about discrimination against girls, child prostitution and child labour. It commended the withdrawal of reservations to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict.  35. South Sudan appreciated the steps taken to integrate human rights into police training college curricula and the engagement of Viet Nam with human rights mechanisms. It encouraged continued efforts to provide education to all without discrimination. 36. Spain expressed concern about the lack of an independent national human rights institution and the imposition of the death penalty for drug trafficking. 37. Sri Lanka praised the early attainment of MDGs, particularly regarding hunger alleviation and poverty reduction. It noted that ratification of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families and a visit by the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants were under consideration. 38. The State of Palestine welcomed efforts to broaden access to social security and to improve the quality of education. 39. The Sudan commended the role given to civil society and the media in amending the Constitution. It praised the attainment of MDG 1 on eradicating extreme poverty and hunger ahead of schedule. 40. Sweden noted an increase in regulations to control the Internet, and arrests of persons for exercising their right to freedom of expression.  41. Switzerland welcomed the signature of CAT. It expressed concern about the right to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and association. 42. Syria commended the broad consultations held for the preparation of the national report through frank dialogue among stakeholders. 43. The Philippines noted progress in ratifying international human rights instruments and engagement with regional human rights bodies. It praised the inclusion of human rights among the constitutional amendments. 44. Timor-Leste noted the steps taken to strengthen the legal system to ensure the protection and promotion of the human rights of citizens, particularly in the area of health. 45. Togo noted progress in honouring international commitments. It commended the achievement of most of the MDGs.  46. Tunisia noted progress made since the review in 2009. It encouraged Viet Nam to fight more effectively all forms of discrimination against women. 47. Turkey commended steps taken to protect the rights of vulnerable groups. It expressed concern about the income gap between rich and poor.  48. Kazakhstan noted the signature of CRPD and the ratification of CAT and steps taken in human rights education among government bodies to ensure freedom of religion and social welfare provision. 49. The United Arab Emirates commended policies and laws regarding the human rights of the population. 50. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland encouraged Viet Nam to ensure that all citizens have the right to freedom of expression and assembly without fear of harassment or imprisonment. 51. The United States of America welcomed progress on protecting the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) persons. It expressed concern about restrictions on freedom of religion and the formation of independent trade unions, and about harassment of unregistered churches. 52. Uruguay highlighted the abolition of the death penalty for some crimes, the signature of CRPD, and policies aimed at strengthening human rights education. 53. Uzbekistan commended the attention paid to UPR. It noted the strengthening of constitutional guarantees, amendments to the Penal Code and the implementation of various human rights awareness-raising programmes. 54. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela praised progress made, particularly with regard to the achievement of most of the MDGs.  55. Yemen commended efforts to improve and develop the human rights situation. It highlighted various measures, including laws to protect elderly people, people with disabilities and trade unions. 56. The delegation reaffirmed the commitment and efforts of the Government to protect and promote human rights by giving detailed supplementary information on domestic legal reform, accession to and implementation of international instruments, the achievement of MDGs, the exercise of freedom of opinion and speech, and the implementation of the Penal Code and Criminal Procedure Code.  57. The delegation gave details of the drafting and adoption process for the 2013 Constitution, which gave human rights, together with citizens’ rights, higher priority than ever before. Under the 2013 Constitution, although restrictions might be put on the exercise of rights for national security, public order and health or morality, they are in conformity with international standards. 58. The newly amended Land Law protects the rights of citizens, especially the rights and legitimate benefits of women citizens regarding ownership and use of land.  59. There had been a reduction in the number of crimes subject to the death penalty in the Penal Code since 2009. Viet Nam would work to further reduce the number of crimes subject to that punishment, particularly during the amending process for the Penal Code by 2016. By 2016, draft laws relating to human rights, such as the Amended Law on the Press, the Law on Association, the Law on Demonstrations and the Law on Information Access, would be submitted for the consideration of the National Assembly.  60. A report on ICCPR was being prepared for submission during 2014. The possibility of acceding to the Convention on Stateless Persons was being studied. Other studies on international human rights instruments, including the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, were under way. 61. The achievement of MDGs was emphasized, as three goals, those of poverty alleviation, universal primary education and gender equity enhancement, had been achieved ahead of schedule. Much progress had been made in achieving other goals. The post-2015 agenda of Viet Nam would focus on sustaining and improving results achieved in the domains of poverty reduction, social equity and HIV/AIDS. 62. The recent boom in the mass media and the wide use of the Internet had helped improve the exercise of freedom of the press and of expression, opinion and access to information. Public debate on democracy had taken place in the National Assembly, in other public forums and in the press on various topics and had included a public poll of confidence in elected public officials at all levels in 2013. 63. In conformity with ICCPR, restrictions on the exercise of the freedoms of expression and opinion were intended to protect public security, safety, order, health and morality, and to prevent the abuse of those freedoms to infringe legitimate rights and benefits or the dignity of other people and entities. The provisions of Decree 72 were in full conformity with the Laws on the Press and Telecommunications. 64. The delegation explained how provisions on national security and public order in the Penal Code were established and implemented in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and ICCPR. It confirmed that, both in law and in practice, persons involved in legal proceedings, including pretrial detainees and prisoners, enjoyed rights and benefits such as family visits, legal assistance, access to justice, telecommunication services, food, health care and recreational activities without discrimination. 65. Afghanistan noted positive action, including the expansion of the education infrastructure for people of different age groups, and work with United Nations bodies to enhance cooperation in tackling child-related sexual crime in the region.  66. Albania commended the cooperation with interested parties at the national level in preparing the national report, and the consultation process for amendments to the Constitution. It welcomed steps to limit the scope of the death penalty. 67. Algeria commended legislative measures to improve the enjoyment of human rights. It referred to the promotion of economic, social and cultural rights, and action taken on education, health and social services.  68. Angola noted progress made since the last review. It commended efforts in the area of education and asked for more information on results obtained on the policy for integrating human rights into education. 69. Nicaragua commended cooperation with special procedures and treaty bodies, and legislative measures to promote respect for human rights. 70. Australia welcomed the accession to CAT and acknowledged the reduction in the number of crimes incurring the death penalty. It remained concerned about restrictions on freedom of expression, assembly and association. 71. Austria was concerned about the number of persons on death row, restrictions on freedom of expression, arrests of journalists and peaceful activists and the fact that the Government had prevented human rights activists from travelling to Geneva.  72. Azerbaijan appreciated the accession to, inter alia, the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and ILO Convention No. 122 (1964) concerning Employment Policy, and commended the cooperation with human rights instruments. 73. Bangladesh expressed its appreciation of socioeconomic improvement and of measures to continue legal reforms, as recommended by Bangladesh during the first UPR. It acknowledged the remaining challenges. 74. Belarus commended the enactment or amendment of laws to boost the enjoyment of human rights, particularly the Law on Human Trafficking. It noted achievements in hunger alleviation, poverty reduction, health care and education. 75. Belgium welcomed advances made since the first UPR cycle.  76. Bhutan commended the adoption of new legislation and the reform of existing laws. It praised the attainment of the MDGs relating to hunger alleviation and poverty reduction, malaria prevention and universal primary education. 77. The Plurinational State of Bolivia welcomed human rights education and training programmes for civil servants, and gender equality policies and programmes. It praised achievements in poverty reduction. 78. Bosnia and Herzegovina noted the accession to CAT. It commended awareness-raising measures for the implementation of recommendations, and dialogue and cooperation with United Nations human rights mechanisms. It acknowledged the commitment to overcome shortcomings. 79. Brazil noted the reduction in extreme poverty, the elimination of hunger, increased women’s participation in the parliament and in government, and amendments to the Land Law. It urged review of the list of crimes punishable by death. 80. Brunei Darussalam welcomed progress in improving economic, social and cultural rights and efforts to improve social welfare, alleviate hunger, reduce poverty and protect the rights of vulnerable groups, including women. 81. Burkina Faso, while acknowledging improvements, urged continued efforts in human rights education, the rights of persons with disabilities, school enrolment and women’s participation in decision-making.  82. Cabo Verde noted progress in numerous areas, including the Government’s intention to create a national human rights institution. It highlighted programmes in place on gender equality and the protection of children and older persons. 83. Cambodia commended the strengthening of the legal system, policies to ensure better enjoyment of economic, social, civil and political rights, and achievements in gender equality and women’s rights.  84. Canada asked whether a date had been set for the adoption of the law on access to information in line with its previous recommendation and the international commitments of Viet Nam under the 2009 UPR. 85. Chad noted that, since the previous review, the promotion and protection of human rights had been made a core element of socioeconomic development strategies. 86. Chile commended efforts to promote and protect human rights, including the adoption of action plans, the strengthening of the institutional framework, and amendments to existing legislation. 87. China commended the implementation of previous recommendations, the promotion of the law on persons with disabilities, the promotion of economic growth and of gender equality, and the protection of the rights of women and children. 88. The Congo noted visits by four special procedures mandate holders, and efforts made in education, economic development and health.  89. Cuba, citing statements by Vietnamese and Cuban leaders in previous decades, confirmed its ongoing solidarity with the people of Viet Nam. 90. The Czech Republic noted the adoption of the new Constitution following a broad consultative process, the lifting of the ban on same-sex marriage and the recent signature of CAT. 91. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea expressed its appreciation of policies and legal measures adopted to further improve the rights and freedoms of all people and encouraged continued efforts. 92. Denmark noted socioeconomic progress and welcomed the new Constitution, which placed greater emphasis on human rights and the rule of law. It remained concerned about restrictions on freedom of expression. 93. Djibouti welcomed sustainable poverty reduction programmes focusing on the most vulnerable and disadvantaged groups, and the gender equality strategy, aimed at eliminating gender disparities and promoting women in society. 94. Ecuador commended programmes aimed at poverty reduction and the eradication of child prostitution and human trafficking. It welcomed the ratification of the Hague Adoption Convention and the enactment of the Law on Persons with Disability. 95. Egypt noted increased human rights education and training activities. It requested details of plans aimed at translating the country’s macroeconomic performance into enhanced measures of social justice and human development.  96. Estonia acknowledged the recent signing of CAT, but noted deficiencies in ensuring the enjoyment of basic civil and political rights. It regretted the continued use of the death penalty. 97. Ethiopia welcomed the birth registration campaign, progress in reducing statelessness, and sustainable poverty reduction programmes, and the special attention paid to disadvantaged groups in housing and education. 98. Finland welcomed achievements in decreasing poverty and improving access to health care and education. It asked how freedom of expression online was enshrined in legislation. 99. France was concerned about further executions and recent death sentences. France invited Viet Nam to adopt a moratorium and engage in a national debate on abolition of the death penalty. It was concerned about restrictions on freedom of expression. 100. The delegation of the State under review stated that activities by trade unions were fully guaranteed under the Constitution, the Law on Trade Union 2012, the Labour Code 2009 and other legal provisions. Legal provisions guaranteed the rights of workers to trade unions and established the responsibility of trade unions to protect the legal rights and interests of workers. Progress had been recognized in the activities of trade unions, with an increase in trade union members to over 500,000, and 4,000 local trade union branches in 2013 alone.  101. A number of legal documents and national policies dealt with the rights of the child, especially regarding child labour, child prostitution and child pornography. Viet Nam cooperated with other international organizations, including ILO. 102. The delegation referred to the progress in protecting and promoting freedom of religion and belief over recent years, such as the increasing number of recognized religious organizations and favourable conditions for places of worship. The publication of books and items for religious purposes, and the import and printing of religious books in ethnic minority languages had been facilitated. Charitable and humanitarian action by religious bodies and dignitaries was encouraged.  103. All ethnic minorities had been given enabling conditions to allow them to enjoy equality with the majority group. Since the previous UPR, the human rights of ethnic minorities had been better protected and promoted. Viet Nam had recorded a large number of National Assembly deputies as well as provincial and local council members from ethnic minorities. Remote and mountainous regions were covered by the Internet and broadcasting services, including channels broadcast in minority languages. Legal assistance for ethnic minorities had been increased, with nearly 2,000 clubs in regions with ethnic minorities. A law on ethnic minorities would be developed in the context of the implementation of the 2013 Constitution. 104. Viet Nam upheld the principles of fairness and equality and guaranteed their enforcement. Fundamental principles to ensure the rights to counsel of defendants, the right to equality before the law and the presumption of innocence were enshrined in legal provisions. The 2013 Constitution guaranteed the principles of independence and strict compliance with the law by judges. In addition, the role and work of lawyers were protected. The right to counsel of detainees and defendants and the equal rights of counsel and procurators were guaranteed. 105. Gabon welcomed legislation adopted to promote and protect the rights of persons with disabilities and combat human trafficking, and a national action plan aimed at providing education for all. 106. Germany commended achievements in combating poverty, the signing of CAT and the decision to decriminalize homosexual partnerships. 107. Greece appreciated efforts to eradicate hunger and poverty. It was concerned about restrictions on freedom of expression, association and assembly. 108. The Islamic Republic of Iran commended the promotion and protection of human rights since the first UPR cycle, including policies on education and the rights of children and persons with disabilities. 109. India welcomed efforts to amend the Constitution to promote and protect human rights, and noted that treaty bodies had welcomed measures to help the poorest ethnic minorities in housing, education and language. 110. Indonesia recognized the commitment to human rights through measures to protect civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, and progress in poverty reduction. It encouraged the sharing of best practices. 111. Romania was confident that, as a member of the Human Rights Council, Viet Nam would uphold the highest standards in human rights. 112. Iraq commended the alignment of national legislation with international human rights obligations. It welcomed the National Strategy on Gender Equality and the integration of human rights issues into police training college curricula. 113. Ireland was gravely concerned about reported harassment and imprisonment of human rights defenders, and noted the lack of an independent media and reports of increasing surveillance by State-owned Internet providers. 114. Italy commended the progress in economic and social rights. It welcomed achievements on the rights of the child and asked about measures envisaged to combat the trafficking and sexual abuse of children. 115. Japan welcomed the efforts to reduce poverty. It encouraged the protection of the rights of vulnerable people. It noted reports of control of the media and constraints on individuals criticizing the Government. 116. Turkmenistan welcomed the efforts to strengthen legislative, institutional and policy mechanisms for the protection and promotion of human rights. It looked forward to receiving more information on new human rights safeguards brought in by amendments to the Constitution. 117. Kyrgyzstan noted progress in poverty alleviation, and the attainment of the MDG on poverty reduction ahead of schedule. Additionally, labour market development programmes had helped workers to find jobs. 118. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic appreciated achievements in implementing MDGs and reducing poverty. It encouraged continued cooperation with the United Nations, international organizations and stakeholders to overcome constraints and challenges. 119. Latvia noted the legislative amendments to discontinue the use of the death penalty and life imprisonment for juveniles. It encouraged more efforts to address gender-based violence. It noted the cooperation with special procedures. 120. Libya commended the adoption of the National Action Plan on older persons and the National Strategy on Gender Equality. 121. Liechtenstein welcomed the legislation on gender equality. It noted concerns about discrimination against girls and women and the persistently high level of physical, sexual and psychological violence against women. 122. Lithuania noted the cessation of the use of the death penalty for juvenile offenders, but remained concerned about the increase in the number of death sentences, restrictions on assembly and harassment of human rights defenders. 123. Luxembourg welcomed progress towards attaining the MDGs. It considered that freedom of the press and expression and the right to a fair trial remained major concerns. 124. Madagascar welcomed the ratification of several international human rights instruments, normative and institutional plans, and progress in socioeconomic and cultural areas. 125. Malaysia noted the significant progress in implementing legislative reforms in line with its previous recommendation, and in human rights education, social welfare, education, hunger eradication and poverty reduction. 126. Mali welcomed measures to strengthen the legal framework of Viet Nam by acceding to several international human rights instruments, and progress in combating social inequalities and towards attaining the MDGs. 127. Mauritania welcomed the establishment of the Committee of Ethnic Minorities to fight against racial discrimination. It commended polices to develop health care and education and to promote human rights education. 128. Mexico commended the recently adopted laws against human trafficking and in support of people with disabilities. It praised the withdrawal of reservations to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography and the national campaign on birth registration. 129. Montenegro was concerned about CRC reports of child prostitution, trafficking and sexual exploitation and commended measures to address those challenges. It asked whether Viet Nam intended to ratify CAT and its optional protocol and the Rome Statute. 130. Morocco commended the attainment of the goal of universal primary education and the dynamic socioeconomic situation of Viet Nam, which had enabled the early attainment of MDGs. 131. Mozambique praised the integration of human rights subjects into school curricula, the provision of human rights training for police and the achievement of most of the MDGs. 132. Myanmar congratulated Viet Nam on the significant progress in reducing poverty and establishing child health programmes.  133. Namibia welcomed the commitment to improving living conditions, the significant reduction in the number of crimes subject to the death penalty, and the decision to remove the death penalty for juvenile offenders. 134. Nepal commended the early achievement of most MDGs and progress in reducing poverty, creating employment, providing social welfare, health care and education, promoting gender equality and protecting the rights of older persons, children and persons with disabilities.  135. The Netherlands was concerned about delays in reforming the Penal Code and Criminal Procedure Code and about legislation against human rights defenders and Internet protesters. It encouraged efforts to align national legislation with international standards and to promote gender equality and non-discrimination. 136. New Zealand remained concerned about prisoner access to legal advice, harassment of human rights lawyers and allegations of arbitrary arrest and detention. It welcomed the reform relating to the application of the death penalty. 137. Argentina, referring to the Law on the Elderly, encouraged the sharing of good practices with the Independent Expert concerned. It urged Viet Nam to review legal provisions concerning the death penalty and to amend the Criminal Procedure Code. 138. Niger welcomed the constitutional and legal reforms, the strengthening of the judiciary and institutions, and policies adopted to guarantee human rights. It noted improved living conditions and poverty reduction in line with the MDGs. 139. Nigeria invited Viet Nam to align domestic legislation with international human rights instruments and to further disseminate human rights-related information. It urged Viet Nam to strengthen its disaster management capacity to include prevention; to facilitate access to health care; to prioritize access to education in rural areas, and to improve social standards. 140. The State under review reiterated the importance of advocacy for dialogue and cooperation on human rights. It had held periodic bilateral dialogues on human rights with a number of other countries while also working actively with specialized United Nations human rights agencies. 141. The State under review expressed its thanks for the constructive comments and recommendations. As the UPR mechanism was aimed at improving the human rights situation on the ground, the greatest benefit would result from the implementation of realistic and deliverable recommendations.  142. The State under review would give careful and serious consideration to every recommendation and would respond accordingly in due course. III. Conclusions and/or recommendations** 143. The following recommendations will be examined by Viet Nam, which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the 26th session of the Human Rights Council in June 2014. 143.1. Continue efforts to ratify international human rights instruments, to which Viet Nam is not yet a party (Nicaragua); Consider signing and ratifying the main international human rights treaties (Albania); Continue its accession to international human rights treaties (Azerbaijan); Ratify international instruments to which Viet Nam is not yet a party (Niger); 143.2. In its implementation of Constitution article 69, ensure compliance with its obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) (Norway); 143.3. Continue to strengthen its efforts to promote and protect fundamental freedoms and rights guaranteed under ICCPR (Republic of Korea); 143.4. Ensure that any law governing the Internet is in compliance with the international human rights obligations of Viet Nam as a State party to ICCPR (Belgium); 143.5. Consider ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Djibouti); 143.6. Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Portugal, Uruguay); 143.7. Consider ratifying the Optional Protocol to ICESCR (Spain);Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to ICESCR (Portugal); 143.8. Ratify the First Optional Protocol to ICCPR; the Optional Protocol to CAT and the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CPED) (Portugal); 143.9. Continue efforts to accede to international human rights treaties, particularly the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment (CAT) (Kazakhstan); 143.10.  Take the necessary steps for timely ratification of CAT (Denmark);  143.11.  Ensure prompt ratification of CAT (Belgium);  143.12.  Ratify CAT (Gabon, Mali, Slovakia); Accede to CAT (Togo);  143.13.  Ratify CAT as soon as possible (Poland, Switzerland);  ** The conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 143.14. Quickly ratify and implement CAT (United States of America); 143.15. Promptly ratify CAT and sign its Optional Protocol (France); Ensure speedy ratification of CAT and the Optional Protocol thereto (Czech Republic); Ratify CAT and its Optional Protocol (Austria, Uruguay); 143.16. Take a step further by becoming a party to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Thailand); 143.17. Withdraw reservations to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and take appropriate measures to combat more effectively discriminatory stereotypes (Gabon); 143.18. Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW) (Egypt); Consider acceding to ICRMW (Algeria); 143.19. Step up efforts to review its domestic legislations and policies with a view to ratifying ICRMW (Philippines); 143.20. Complete the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) (Turkey); 143.21. Ratify CRPD, CAT, CPED and ICRMW (Burkina Faso); 143.22. Continue efforts undertaken to ensure ratification of CPED, as well as the main international human rights instruments, to which the country is not yet a party (Argentina); 143.23. Consider ratifying CPED (Uruguay); Accede to CPED (Iraq); 143.24. Consider ratifying outstanding human rights treaties and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and withdraw existing reservations to treaties, to which Viet Nam is a party (Slovenia); 143.25. Continue the ratification of international human rights instruments, considering, in particular, ratification of the Rome Statute (Romania); 143.26. Consider ratifying the Rome Statute (Greece, Uruguay); Take into consideration the possibility of acceding to the Rome Statute (Italy); Ratify the Rome Statute (Estonia); 143.27. Ratify/accede to the Rome Statute and implement it fully at the national level, and accede to the Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of the Court (Slovakia); Ratify the Rome Statute and fully align its national legislation with all obligations under the Rome Statute (Latvia);  Accede to the Rome Statute as amended at the Review Conference in Kampala in 2010 and align its national legislation with all obligations under the Rome Statute (Liechtenstein); 143.28. Consider ratifying other pending fundamental International Labour Organization (ILO) Conventions such as Convention No. 189 (2011) concerning decent work for domestic workers (Uruguay); 143.29. Harmonize its legislation, regulations and policies with ILO Convention No. 29 (1930) concerning Forced or Compulsory Labour and No. 138 (1973) concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (Uruguay); 143.30. Strengthen its legal and institutional framework by ratifying CAT and its Optional Protocol, CPED and the Rome Statute (Tunisia); 143.31. Continue with the Constitutional review process aimed at strengthening the legal system and policies on human rights (Mozambique); 143.32. Continue developing the human rights legal framework (Sudan); 143.33. Implement a legal system which improves the human rights of peasants and other persons working in rural areas (Plurinational State of Bolivia); 143.34. Ensure that the 1999 Penal Code and 2003 Criminal Procedures Code, and their implementation are consistent with its international human rights obligations (Norway); 143.35. Continue strengthening national mechanisms to promote and protect human rights (Nepal); 143.36. Continue efforts to strengthen its institutional frameworks for human rights, including by giving consideration towards the establishment of a national human rights institution as guided by the Paris Principles (Indonesia); 143.37. Consider establishing a national human rights institution (Thailand); 143.38. Establish a national institution for the promotion and the protection of human rights (Morocco); 143.39. Establish an independent national human rights institution (Niger); 143.40. Establish an independent national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Portugal, Spain); 143.41. Establish a national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Congo, France, Madagascar, Togo); 143.42. Accelerate the process aimed at the establishment of a national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles, and extend a standing invitation to special procedures (Tunisia); 143.43. Continue further improvement of the protection and promotion of human rights in the country (Azerbaijan); 143.44. Raise awareness among its people of laws and regulations so that they can exercise their rights effectively and adequately (Bhutan); 143.45. Continue efforts to promote and protect the rights of all segments of the population (Nepal); 143.46. Continue Government efforts to guarantee the exercise of power by, with, and for the people of Viet Nam (Cuba); 143.47. Strengthen policies to protect children, vulnerable groups and the disadvantaged (Madagascar); 143.48. Take effective measures to better guarantee the rights of vulnerable groups such as women, children, the elderly, and people with disabilities (Myanmar); 143.49. Continue to take appropriate measures and to provide adequate resources to ensure the socio-economic rights of vulnerable groups (Madagascar);  143.50. Maintain efforts undertaken to identify human rights violations (Djibouti); 143.51. Continue measures aimed at enhancing the capacity of the national human rights mechanism (Uzbekistan); 143.52. Build the capacity of national institutions and mechanisms to promote and protect human rights in the implementation of international human rights instruments (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 143.53. Better attract and facilitate the participation of socio-political organizations in the promotion and protection of human rights (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 143.54. Build the capacity for officers whose work concerns protection of the rights of vulnerable groups, especially children and persons with disabilities (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 143.55. Continue policies aimed at reducing inequalities in access to the full enjoyment of human rights by all social groups with paying special attention to women, children and persons with disabilities (Kazakhstan); 143.56. Continue to carry out the policy on the protection and promotion of human rights of vulnerable groups, including children, women, persons with disabilities, and elderly persons (Russian Federation); 143.57. Continue improving the living standards of poor persons and those living in remote areas to which access is difficult (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 143.58. Continue raising the awareness of the population through human rights education programmes (Mali); 143.59. Continue supporting human rights education at all level of the education system through the appropriate measures and content (Egypt); 143.60. Further enhance efforts to develop the human rights education system and to strengthen a culture of human rights (Uzbekistan); 143.61. Continue dissemination of and training on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other international human rights instruments (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 143.62. Continue work on introducing awareness-raising and educational programmes on human rights into the curricula of schools and universities and on organizing relevant programmes for civil servants (Belarus); 143.63. Strengthen human rights education to ensure that the population is better informed (Djibouti); 143.64. Increase education on human rights to raise public awareness and the capacity of relevant legal agencies to better ensure the rights and basic freedoms of the people within the nation’s rule of law (Myanmar); 143.65. Strengthen human rights education by providing special programmes for law enforcement officials and the judiciary (Morocco); 143.66. Consider further cooperation with the international human rights monitoring mechanisms, including treaty bodies and Special procedures of the Human Rights Council (Turkmenistan); 143.67. Continue its cooperation with the High Commissioner for Human Rights, treaty bodies and special procedures mandate holders (Chad); 143.68. Further strengthen cooperation with human rights mechanisms, improve compliance with treaty body reporting mechanisms and consider accession to the First Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Poland); 143.69. Fully address recommendations and issues of concern raised by the Committee on the Rights of the Child with regard to child abuses and allocation of economic resources (Albania); 143.70. Consider extending a standing invitation to special procedures (Slovenia); Consider extending a standing invitation to all special procedures of the Human Rights Council (Latvia); 143.71. Issue a standing invitation to special procedures (Austria); Issue a standing invitation to all special procedures (Czech Republic, United Kingdom, Greece); Extend a standing invitation to all thematic special procedures (Montenegro); Extend an open invitation to all special procedures of the Human Rights Council (Uruguay); 143.72. Extend a standing invitation to all special procedures mandate holders as a sign of goodwill to cooperate fully with all human rights mechanisms (Germany); 143.73. Accept all outstanding and new requests from mandate holders to visit the country (Hungary); 143.74. Respond positively to the requests of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression for a visit (Mexico); 143.75. Continue its active engagement with the United Nations human rights mechanisms for the protection and promotion of human rights (Azerbaijan); 143.76. Continue cooperation with all mechanisms of the Human Rights Council (Romania); 143.77. Work on strengthening international cooperation in the field of human rights (Turkmenistan); 143.78. Actively participate in the work of the Human Rights Council on the basis of dialogue and cooperation to contribute to enhancement of the capacity, effectiveness, transparency and objectivity of the Council (Pakistan); 143.79. Accelerate fulfilment of its voluntary commitments as a member of the Council, especially by increasing resources to ensure social security and welfare of its citizens as well as the rights of vulnerable groups (Brunei Darussalam); 143.80. Continue efforts in implementing its National Strategy on Gender Equality (Cambodia); 143.81. Further enhance people’s awareness of gender issues (Cambodia); 143.82. Work on policies and strategies to enhance awareness on gender issues (Ethiopia); 143.83. Significantly increase efforts to raise awareness among its population of gender equality and non-discrimination of women and girls (Liechtenstein); 143.84. Eliminate all forms of discrimination against girls, and ensure gender mainstreaming in all anti-discrimination policies and programmes (Slovenia); 143.85. Further implement relevant measures to protect women’s and children’s rights to improve women’s status in economic, social and family life, and to combat violence against women (China); 143.86. Continue implementation of policies to combat discrimination against people from disadvantaged groups, including providing them with access to social security, health services, education and housing (Serbia); 143.87. Combat discrimination against women through anti-trafficking legislation; by ensuring women’s entitlement to land in the Land Law; and by curbing domestic violence and violations of reproductive rights (Netherlands); 143.88. Enact a law to fight against discrimination which guarantees the equality of all citizens, regardless of their sexual orientation and gender identity (Chile); 143.89. Continue to reduce offences subjected to the death penalty (Belgium); 143.90. Continue to work towards reducing the number of crimes subject to the death penalty (Namibia); 143.91. Reduce the number of crimes punishable by death by December 2014 (United Kingdom); 143.92. Reduce the list of crimes punishable by death penalty, in particular economic crimes and those linked to drugs, and examine the possibility of introducing a moratorium (Switzerland); 143.93. Further reduce the number of crimes carrying the death penalty and publish figures on death verdicts (Germany); 143.94. Consider at least further restricting the use of the death penalty only for the most serious crimes, as stated in article 6 of ICCPR with a view to soon adopting a de facto moratorium on executions (Italy); 143.95. Continue reform towards eventual abolition of the death penalty, including greater transparency around its use (New Zealand); 143.96.  Consider abolition of the death penalty in the near future (Greece);  143.97.  Consider establishing a moratorium on the death penalty (Ecuador);  143.98.  Consider a moratorium  on  the death penalty with  a  view  to its  eventual abolition (Slovenia); 143.99. Consider a moratorium on the use of the death penalty with a view to its abolition (Namibia); 143.100. Consider imposing a moratorium on execution of death penalties while assessing the possibility of adopting the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR aimed at the abolition of the death penalty (Brazil); 143.101. Continue to work towards abolition of the death penalty and consider adopting an immediate de facto moratorium (Portugal); 143.102. Reintroduce a moratorium on executions with a view to abolition of the death penalty (Czech Republic); 143.103. Establish a moratorium on executions with a view to removing the death penalty from its criminal statutes and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Australia); 143.104. Establish a moratorium on the death penalty with a view to becoming a party to the second Optional Protocol to ICCPR, and continue with efforts to uphold all international human rights standards, including civil and political rights (Estonia); 143.105. Establish a moratorium on the use of the death penalty with a view to its abolition, and, in the meantime, ensure full compliance in all death penalty cases with international fair trial standards (Lithuania); 143.106. Establish a moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing the death penalty (France); 143.107. Establish an official moratorium on the use of the death penalty with a view to abolition (Montenegro); 143.108. Establish a moratorium on executions with a view to the total abolition of capital punishment (Belgium); 143.109. Institute a moratorium on the application of the death penalty (Togo); 143.110. Immediately adopt a moratorium on the death penalty as a first step towards its abolition (Austria); 143.111. Adopt an indefinite moratorium on the death penalty and commute current convictions to achieve its total abolition (Spain); 143.112. Declare a moratorium on the capital punishment; until that, promptly reduce the number of offences subject to death penalty and publish statistics about the use of death penalty in Viet Nam (Sweden); 143.113. Publish precise information on the identity and number of convicted persons currently on death row (Belgium); 143.114. Continue using its sovereign right to apply the death penalty as a tool of criminal justice in accordance with the proper safeguards specified under international human rights law (Egypt); 143.115. Take into account the opinions of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention on the release of around 30 persons detained arbitrarily since the last UPR (Switzerland); 143.116. Implement the opinions of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention on individuals and release the individuals concerned (New Zealand); 143.117. Immediately release all prisoners held in arbitrary detention and recompense them as requested by the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (Germany); 143.118. Revise vague national security laws that are used to suppress universal rights, and unconditionally release all political prisoners, such as Dr. Cu Huy Ha Vu, Le Quoc Quan, Dieu Cay and Tran Huynh Duy Thuc (United States of America); 143.119. Ensure in law and in practice the protection of women against all forms of violence (Canada); 143.120. Strengthen the national system of investigating complaints of child abuse and neglect, eliminate violence against children, and establish policies to protect children from all forms of violence (Poland); 143.121. Develop alternative measures to deprivation of children’s liberty and provide children with rehabilitation and reintegration programmes (Republic of Moldova); 143.122. Pursue efforts to combat human trafficking, especially of women (Yemen); 143.123. Continue to be actively engaged in regional human rights bodies, particularly those concerning the promotion and protection of the rights of women and combating trafficking in persons (Philippines); 143.124. Undertake measures targeted at vulnerable groups, particularly children, in order to prevent trafficking in human beings for labour and sexual exploitation (Republic of Moldova); 143.125. Intensify action against child prostitution, child trafficking and the use of children in the sex trade, in accordance with the 2011–2015 action plan against prostitution (Mexico); 143.126. Enhance support for the reintegration of victims of trafficking, especially women and children (India); 143.127. Expedite implementation of the reform of the judicial system and intensify within the system a culture of systematic respect of human rights (Cabo Verde); 143.128. Continue to take measures to secure the rule of law, including by establishing a criminal justice system that gives due consideration to human rights (Japan); 143.129. Continue to enhance the rule of law, the legal and judicial system and mechanisms in the country to promote and protect human rights (Malaysia); 143.130. Continue strengthening the judiciary based on the principles of the independence of judges and prosecutors and ensure equal access for all to the justice system (Serbia); 143.131. Pursue efforts in the field of judicial reform and upgrade laws to reflect the will and interest of all segments of society (Syrian Arab Republic); 143.132. Strengthen its judicial system and take effective measures to fight poverty (Angola); 143.133. Take the necessary measures to guarantee its citizens’ right to equality before the law, to be presumed innocent until proven guilty, and to a fair and public trial, as well as the right to freedom from arbitrary arrest or detention (Canada); 143.134. Guarantee the right of all persons to a fair trial and, in particular, allow for the presence without restriction of observers at court hearings (Luxembourg); 143.135. Ensure that efficient procedures and responsive mechanisms for effective and equal access to lawyers are provided for at all stages of legal proceedings (Denmark); 143.136. Provide public information on the number of detention camps, including administrative detention centres for drug treatment set up by the police, the military and the Ministry of Labour, on the number of persons detained therein; as well as on all forms of work in which detainees are involved (Austria); 143.137. Guarantee the right to family visits and legal assistance, in particular during police inquiries (Switzerland); 143.138. Provide, in accordance with its obligations under international human rights instruments, effective protection for the family as the fundamental and natural unit of society (Egypt); 143.139. Adjust the regulatory and legal framework to comply with international human rights standards in order to guarantee freedom of religion (Chile); 143.140. Continue its policies and programmes to promote religious tolerance and harmony in society (Singapore); 143.141. Encourage Viet Nam to continue to improve conditions of worship for all, enhance exchange of laws, and disseminate values of tolerance and peace with a view to developing principles of interfaith dialogue (United Arab Emirates); 143.142. Adopt further measures aimed at better guaranteeing freedom of religion, particularly by eliminating bureaucratic and administrative obstacles, which hinder the activities carried out by religious communities and groups (Italy); 143.143. Reduce administrative obstacles and registration requirements applicable to peaceful religious activities by registered and non-registered religious groups in order to guarantee freedom of religion or belief (Canada); 143.144. Further implement measures aimed at promoting freedom of expression and association and freedom of the media in line with the most advanced international standards (Italy); 143.145. Take all necessary action to respect and promote the right to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and association in line with its international human rights obligations (Lithuania); 143.146. Actively promote steps to guarantee freedom of expression, as well as the freedom and independence of the press, including on the Internet (Japan);  143.147. Ensure that Viet Nam complies with its international obligations regarding freedom of expression, religion and assembly (Belgium); 143.148. Allow bloggers, journalists, other internet users and non.governmental organizations (NGOs) to promote and protect human rights specifically by ensuring that laws concerning the Internet comply with the freedom of expression and information (Netherlands); 143.149. Protect and guarantee respect for freedom of information and expression, particularly for journalists, bloggers and human rights defenders, and undertake a review of legislation governing the press to ensure its compliance with international standards (Luxembourg); 143.150. Take steps to amend its Penal Code to ensure that it cannot be applied in an arbitrary manner to prevent freedom of expression (Finland); 143.151. Repeal or amend ambiguous provisions relating to national security in the Penal Code to prevent those provisions being applied in an arbitrary manner to stifle legitimate and peaceful dissent, debate and freedom of expression (Denmark); 143.152. Repeal or modify the Penal Code relating to national security particularly Articles 79, 88 and 258, in order to prevent those articles from being applied in an arbitrary manner to impede freedom of opinion and expression, including on the Internet (France); 143.153. Protect freedom of expression both offline and online by bringing legislation such as Decrees 2 and 72 into compliance with international human rights law (New Zealand); 143.154. Revise “Decree 72” and “Decree 174” relating to the management, provision and use of the Internet, to ensure their consistency with international human rights obligations, and in particular with Articles 19, 21 and 22 of ICCPR (Ireland); 143.155. Ensure that Decree 72, concerning the management, provision and use of Internet services and information online, is implemented in a manner that does not limit individuals’ rights to voice their opinions online (Finland); 143.156. Give space to non-state media, and that make Criminal Code Articles 79, 88 and 258 more specific and consistent with international human rights obligations on freedom of expression (Australia); 143.157. Amend the provisions concerning offences against national security which could restrict freedom of expression, including on the Internet, particularly articles 79, 88 and 258 of the Penal Code, to ensure its compliance with Viet Nam’s international obligations, including ICCPR (Canada); 143.158. Take the necessary measures to protect freedom of expression and press freedom, including through the Internet (Brazil); 143.159. Undertake measures enabling unrestricted access and use of the Internet to all citizens and undertake measures to guarantee the freedom of opinion and expression to everyone, as well as the freedom of press and media in the country (Estonia); 143.160. Take measures to ensure the effective protection of the right to freedom of expression and information, as well as the independence of the media, and release all human rights defenders, journalists, and religious and political dissidents detained for the peaceful expression of their opinion (Czech Republic); 143.161. Guarantee the right to freedom of expression both offline and online, and bring Decree 72 into line with international human rights obligations (Austria); 143.162. Give individuals, groups and organs of society the legitimacy and recognition to promote human rights and express their opinions or dissent publicly (Norway); 143.163. Ensure that its legal framework allows for free and independent operation of national and international media in accordance with its international human rights obligations under ICCPR (Norway); 143.164. In line with its previous commitments, take all measures to ensure that freedom of expression, including on the Internet, is fully guaranteed in law and practice by bringing its legislation in line with the obligations of Viet Nam under ICCPR (Hungary); 143.165. Create conditions favourable to the realization of freedom of expression, both online and offline, freedom of association, and freedom of religion and belief (Poland); 143.166. Ensure that freedom of expression is protected both offline and online and amend or remove vague provisions in the penal code, as well as new legislation to make sure that limitations on freedom of expression are strictly in line with ICCPR (Sweden); 143.167. Ensure a favourable environment for the activities of human rights defenders, journalists and other civil society actors (Tunisia); 143.168. Implement in a more effective manner the recommendations guaranteeing the right to freedom of expression (Chile); 143.169. Encourage strengthening of NGOs by promoting a legal, administrative and fiscal framework in which such institutions can be created and developed and perform their activities without any obstacles and with freedom of expression (Spain); 143.170. Maintain the momentum of development of the mass media, including the Internet, so as to protect freedom of expression (Pakistan); 143.171. Fulfil its obligation under ICCPR and fully guarantee the freedom of assembly and freedom of expression on the Internet as well as offline to all its citizens (Germany); 143.172. Take measures to ensure freedom of association, peaceful assembly and demonstration (France); 143.173. Facilitate the development of a safe and enabling environment for all civil society actors to freely associate and express their views by ensuring that national legislative provisions are not invoked to stifle legitimate and peaceful dissent (Ireland); 143.174. Take concrete steps to create a friendly environment for NGOs, including by easing their registration requirements (Czech Republic); 143.175. Enact laws to provide for and regulate freedom of assembly and peaceful demonstration in line with ICCPR (Australia); 143.176. Adopt measures to end prosecution of peaceful protesters (Greece); 143.177. Enhance equal political participation of its citizens, including by taking steps towards multi-party democracy (Czech Republic); 143.178. Deepen grass-roots democracy and better facilitate the right of the people to participate in the formulation and implementation of policies, such as the participation of political and social organizations in the field of human rights (Myanmar); 143.179. Undertake measures to enhance the participation of women in legislative, judicial and executive bodies (Pakistan); 143.180. Protect internationally recognized workers’ rights and enforce laws prohibiting forced labour (United States of America); 143.181. Pursue efforts to create new job opportunities and to promote a legal framework for the labour market (Syrian Arab Republic); 143.182. Study and develop a more effective and convenient public service system, especially in social insurance, education and training, health care and legal assistance (Timor-Leste); 143.183. Continue to make every effort to promote economic and social development, further increase the level of social security and better promote people’s livelihood (China); 143.184. Increase resources from the State budget and mobilize more financial resources from international cooperation to implement policies on social security (Timor-Leste); 143.185. Improve access by disadvantaged groups to social security (State of Palestine); 143.186. Continue implementing policies and programmes to assist poor people, improve their standard of living and ensure their access to social services (Syrian Arab Republic); 143.187. Continue appropriate measures to ensure the realization of the socioeconomic rights of its people and to provide adequate resources for vulnerable groups facing economic challenges (Islamic Republic of Iran); 143.188. Continue its efforts to improve access to education, housing and health-care services (Singapore); 143.189. Focus on mitigating income inequalities, providing equal opportunities in education and employment, and improving social security and health services for all segments of the population (Turkey); 143.190. Continue to take measures to guarantee poverty reduction and universal access to health services and education (Cuba); 143.191. Extend the scope of health insurance coverage for poor families (Kyrgyzstan); 143.192. Exert greater efforts to further reduce the child mortality rate (Ethiopia); 143.193. Ensure education free of charge in practice (Kyrgyzstan); 143.194. Improve its efforts on educational reform towards a comprehensive education policy with a particular focus on vulnerable groups, including children, person with disabilities and minorities (Islamic Republic of Iran); 143.195. Further develop the quality of education and health-care policies in the country (Kazakhstan); 143.196. Further expand efforts to provide all its citizens with access to school and to ensure equal enjoyment of the right to education, and increase bilingual education programmes (Afghanistan); 143.197. Strengthen activities in favour of rural areas by focusing on education and on preventing disadvantaged children from dropping out of school (Senegal); 143.198. Continue increasing investment in education and health through its successful social policies (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 143.199. Continue intensifying efforts to provide high quality education and medical services to the population, including in remote rural areas (Belarus); 143.200. Continue its efforts to reduce inequality in education, particularly the quality gap in education between urban and rural areas (Bhutan); 143.201. Continue to improve access to education in rural areas (India); 143.202. Increase investments aimed at closing the quality gap between education in urban and rural, remote areas or those with ethnic minorities, as well as investments aimed at increasing education on the content of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and core international human rights instruments (State of Palestine); 143.203. Continue to improve the quality of education in rural and mountainous areas, and consider increasing the subsidy allocated to education in those areas (Algeria); 143.204. Pursue efforts to overcome challenges relating to improvement of the quality of education and to close the gap between urban, rural and remote areas (Syrian Arab Republic); 143.205. Continue its efforts to ensure the rights of persons with disabilities, including through the finalization of the ratification of CRPD (Indonesia); 143.206. Continue efforts to adopt the requisite measures to enable people with disabilities, especially children, to have access to the necessary education and health care, and to combat any discrimination against them (Libya);  143.207. Continue to step up measures aimed at eradicating discrimination and social prejudices against ethnic minorities and persons with disabilities (Argentina); 143.208. Continue efforts to promote and protect human rights of ethnic minorities (Ecuador); 143.209. Develop appropriate policies and measures to effectively support ethnic minorities (Islamic Republic of Iran); 143.210. Continue working on national programmes directed to protect the rights of the country’s minorities (Nicaragua); 143.211. Undertake awareness-raising campaigns to change the mindset regarding persons belonging to ethnic minorities, and remedy the lack of a legislative framework designed to guarantee non-discrimination (Congo); 143.212. Take more adequate measures to provide education to ethnic minorities (South Sudan); 143.213. Ensure without delay effective protection of the rights of ethnic and religious minorities (Cabo Verde); 143.214. Respect the rights of ethnic and religious minorities and take the necessary measures to prevent and halt persecution, forced eviction and confiscation of their property (Mexico); 143.215. Combat poverty among migrant workers (Kyrgyzstan); 143.216. Continue in its endeavour to establish a broad-based, sustainable and participatory development framework to reach the disadvantaged groups of society (Ethiopia); 143.217. Adopt policies that will allow the active involvement of minority communities through consultation and participation in decision-making processes relating to areas affecting them, particularly on development issues (Namibia); 143.218. Continue development programmes, especially in rural areas (Oman);  143.219. Continue promoting the participation of citizens in decision-making processes (Nicaragua); 143.220. Continue national poverty reduction efforts (Sudan); 143.221. Continue its efforts in a systematic way to ensure the eradication of hunger and extreme poverty (Greece); 143.222. Continue to take steps to gradually bridge the gap in the standard of living between urban and rural areas (India); 143.223. Take further measures to ensure equitable and sustainable poverty reduction giving particular attention to vulnerable groups, especially in rural areas (Sri Lanka); 143.224. Reduce the disparities in the quality of education between urban, rural, remote areas or areas inhabited by ethnic minorities (Morocco); 143.225. Share its successful experiences on poverty reduction, food security and the fight against epidemics (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 143.226. Explore the possibilities for technical support, for instance through the Working Group on Enabling and Protecting Civil Society of the Community of Democracies (Canada); 143.227. Participate actively in the international programmes of technical assistance and capacity-building in the field of human rights (Turkmenistan); 144. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of Viet Nam was headed by Mr. Ha Kim Ngoc, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs and composed of the following members: • Mr. Hoang Chi Trung, Director General of International Organizations Department., MOFA; • Mr. Le Dinh Luyen, Chief of the Office of Steering Committee for Human Rights, MPS; • Mr. Le Van Nghiem, Director General of Foreign Information Service, MIC; • Mr. Nguyen 	Khanh Ngoc, Director General of International Laws Department., MOJ; • Ms. Le	 Kim Dung, Director General of International Cooperation Department, MOLISA; • Ms. Vy Xuan Hoa, Director General of International Cooperation Dept., Committee on Ethnic Minority Affairs ICEMA): • Ms. Bui Thi Minh, Judge of Criminal Court of People’s Supreme Courl; • Mr. Nguyen	 Manh Trung, Deputy Director General, Foreign Information and International • Cooperation Dept., Commission for Communication and Education of the Party Central Committee; • Ms. Trinh Thi Thuy Hang, Deputy Director General of Internal Affairs Deptartment, Government Office; • Mr. Vu Anh Quang, Deputy Director General, Dept., of International Organizations, MOFA; • Ms. Tran	 Thi Minh Nga, Deputy Director General of Buddhism Department, Government Committee for Religious Affairs; • Ms. Nguyen	 Yen Hai, Deputy Director General Foreign Economic Relations Department, MPI; • Mr. Pham Binh Dam, Deputy Director General of National Translation Center; • Ms. Pham	 Thi Kim Anh, Deputy Director General, Dept. of International Organizations, MOFA; • Mr. Nguyen Thanh Huy, Desk Officer, Office of MOFA; • Mr. Tran Chi Thanh, Desk Offrcer, International Organizations Dept., MOFA; • Mr. Ngo Le Hoang Vu, Desk Officer, International Organisations Dept:, MOFA; • Ms. Ha Thi Thanh Huyen, International Organisations Dept., MOFA; • Mr. Vu Viet Hung, Desk Officer, National Translation Center; • Mr. Nguyen Trung Hieu, Officer, Office of Steering Committee for Human Rights, MPS; • Ms. Pham Hong Minh, Office of Steering Committee for Human Rights, MPS; • Mr. Dao	 Quy Loc, Desk Officer, International Laws Dept., MOJ. C/ Two Journalists: • Mr. Le Hong Quang; • Mr. Doan MaiHa. 