Distr.: General 7 July 2014 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-seventh session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Albania * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.14-07677  (E) *1407677* 
Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–103 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–25 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 26–103 6 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 104–107 14  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 26 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its nineteenth session from 28 April to 9 May 2014. The review of Albania was held at the 2nd meeting, on 28 April 2014. The delegation of Albania was headed by Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative to the United Nations Office and other international organizations in Geneva, Filloreta Kodra. At its 10th meeting, held on 2 May 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on Albania. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Albania: Austria, Kenya and Montenegro. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Albania: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/19/ALB/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/19/ALB/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/19/ALB/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, the Czech Republic, Germany, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, Mexico, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Albania through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR). I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation of Albania stated that since the first UPR cycle, Albania had improved its legal, institutional and policy framework in several human rights areas, including gender equality, the rights of women and children, combating domestic violence and human trafficking, education, health care, the justice system, combating corruption, and the rights of persons with disabilities. The Government had undertaken a series of measures to promote and protect human rights by implementing recommendations put forward during the first cycle. 6. The Ombudsman and the Commissioner for Protection from Discrimination played an important role in promoting and protecting human rights. The Commissioner provided assistance to victims of discrimination by addressing individual complaints and conducting ex-officio investigations. The number of cases examined by the Commissioner had significantly increased. The Commissioner had proposed a number of legal amendments aimed at aligning domestic legislation with international standards, including amendments to the Criminal Code in view of avoiding the prosecution of victims of human trafficking. 7. The delegation reported on measures undertaken by Albania to protect the rights of women, ensure gender equality and combat domestic violence, including the adoption of the National Strategy on Gender Equality and Reduction of Gender-Based Violence and Domestic Violence for 2011-2015. One important objective of the Strategy was an increase in the participation of women in political and public life. In 2013, the number of women in Parliament and in the Government had increased. Ministries had begun the consultation process regarding the implementation of gender mainstreaming in the medium-term budget programme. 8. Regarding assistance to victims of domestic violence, the necessary measures had been taken to strengthen the national referral mechanism, offer legal assistance to the victims of domestic violence and ensure special treatment and protection of the victims of domestic violence accommodated in the national shelter for rehabilitation. An online case registration system and a toll-free telephone line for victims of domestic violence had been established and capacity-building of the respective professionals undertaken. 9. In addition to the adoption of the Law on the Protection of the Rights of the Child, the Government had initiated the elaboration of a working protocol as a methodological guide to child protection efforts for local and national State agencies involved in the protection of children. The law on pre-university education ensured that children under custody enjoyed all their rights and had access to education. Those children were provided with free textbooks and with psychosocial care, and were entitled to special quotas in secondary and higher education. 10. In the framework of ongoing administrative and territorial reforms, the Government had planned to strengthen the child protection units and increase their capacities to enable them to offer high-quality services for children and their families. 11. The Government had undertaken new initiatives with the aim of protecting children from all forms of abuse, exploitation and neglect through coordinated intervention and a comprehensive approach to the protection of the interests of the child and support for families. A draft plan and draft procedural guidelines had been prepared for professionals involved in the identification, referral and case management of children in street situations. 12. To improve the juvenile justice system a, special institution for the treatment of minors serving prison sentences had been set up and had started functioning with the financial support of the European Union. 13. The National Action Plan for the Decade of Roma Inclusion 2010-2015 was aimed at improving the socioeconomic status, social inclusion and integration of the Roma. Specific policies and programmes, including free training courses, had been implemented to promote employment for the Roma in general and for Roma women in particular. 14. A small grants programme, funded by the 2014 State budget,  had been implemented to improve the housing conditions of the Roma and Egyptian communities. Municipalities had been entitled to apply for small grants to implement projects aimed at improving the housing conditions of those communities. 15. Education was a national priority of the Government. Measures had been taken to address the school dropout rate, including implementation of the “zero school dropout initiative”. Legislative, administrative and institutional measures had also been taken to guarantee the inclusion of Roma children and youth in the mainstream education system. The number of Roma children in the education system had increased and the enrolment of Roma children in schools was ensured, even in the absence of a birth certificate. 16. The delegation stated that the participation of children in decision-making had been guaranteed by domestic legislation, including participation in the process of approval of mid-term and long-term plans of their educational institutions and in procedures for the appointment and dismissal of school directors. 17. To step up the fight against human trafficking, a series of measures had been taken to improve the legal framework. In 2013, legal amendments to the Criminal Code had been adopted to address internal human trafficking. Amendments to the relevant laws had introduced a provision for financial assistance to the victims of trafficking, in addition to the social services provided in the reception and reintegration centres. By-laws had been adopted in order to coordinate effectively the work of the central and local structures in their fight against human trafficking. 18. A series of measures, including public awareness-raising campaigns, had been taken to prevent cases of human trafficking. The Government had strengthened its cooperation and partnership with civil society and had established an advisory group comprising civil society organizations that worked on issues related to trafficking. Moreover, it was planned to draft a strategy and a new plan of action in the fight against trafficking in human beings. 19. A plan of action had been drafted in order to fight the phenomenon of blood feuds and revenge. A specialized office had been established to direct, control and coordinate the activity of  structures working to prevent and combat cases of blood feud. The Government had increased its cooperation with the local government and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to settle disputes by means of reconciliation. 20. In addition to the legal measures adopted to combat discrimination, Albania had developed a plan for 2012-2014 to address discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation and gender identity. It included guidance and directions for educational institutions with a view to creating a safe environment in schools, in which there would be no intolerance or social exclusion on the grounds of sexual orientation and gender identity. 21. The delegation stated that important reforms had been made to protect the human rights of detainees. In April 2014, several amendments had been adopted in order to improve the rights of persons deprived of their liberty, and the conditions and treatment of convicted persons. The new Mid-Term Strategy of the Prison System and its Action Plan had been drafted for 2014-2017, setting a number of priorities, including the harmonization of legislation with the Community acquis, and improvement of the infrastructure and material conditions of the penitentiary institutions. 22. In 2014, the implementation of the new law granting amnesty had resulted in a significant reduction in prison overcrowding. The construction of two penitentiary institutions in 2014 would also contribute to addressing prison overcrowding and improve general conditions in the penitentiary system. 23. Monitoring of places of detention had been carried out by specialized institutions within or outside the prison system. In 2014, the General Directorate of Prisons had signed 14 agreements with NGOs to enable them to carry out inspections. A working group had been set up to develop an anti-corruption strategy for the prison system. 24. Albania had extended a standing invitation to all the special procedures and two special rapporteurs had visited the country during the reporting period. The Government had pledged to continue working with special procedure mandate holders in implementing their recommendations. Albania was considering accepting the individual complaints procedure under all the human rights conventions to which it was a party. 25. Albania had submitted its candidacy for membership of the Human Rights Council for 2015-2017. The protection and promotion of human rights had been a priority of the new Government and it would continue to fulfil its international obligations by implementing relevant legislation and policies, increasing public awareness and strengthening cooperation between different stakeholders in the field of human rights. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 26. During the interactive dialogue, 63 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II below. 27. Sierra Leone noted ongoing efforts to protect children’s rights, particularly amendments to corresponding legislation. It commended the incorporation of human rights in the national legislation in compliance with obligations under international conventions. It encouraged Albania to proceed with strategies to ensure social integration of the minorities for the full enjoyment of their rights. Sierra Leone made recommendations. 28. Slovakia commended Albania on its cooperation with the human rights mechanisms. While noting various legislative amendments, Slovakia considered that efforts to implement human rights legislation should be intensified. It expressed concern about discrimination towards the Roma community and the lack of access to education for Roma children. Resources and policies in that area should be strengthened. Slovakia made recommendations. 29. Slovenia commended progress regarding domestic violence and welcomed the amendment and adoption of relevant legislation, but was concerned at reports of domestic violence and ineffective investigation into complaints. It noted the high dropout rate of girls from primary school. It urged the Government of Albania to increase protection for vulnerable groups, particularly women and girls. Slovenia made recommendations. 30. Spain recognized efforts to eliminate gender-based discrimination and the adoption of a national strategy and action plan for the Roma people. It highlighted the observation of the Committee on the Rights of the Child that corporal punishment of children was widespread at home and school. It congratulated Albania on its ratification of the Convention of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Spain made recommendations. 31. Sweden expressed concern about blood feuds, the extent of which was not fully known, resulting in a lack of preventive measures. While welcoming efforts to strengthen women’s rights, it noted the underrepresentation of women in public office. It nevertheless congratulated Albania for fulfilling the 30 per cent quota for women in the Council of Ministers. Sweden made recommendations. 32. Switzerland was concerned at shortcomings in child protection. It applauded the adoption of legislation against discrimination but noted the prevalence of gender-based discrimination. It regretted that the Egyptian community was not recognized as a minority, and was concerned at discrimination against that group. Switzerland made recommendations. 33. Thailand noted efforts to combat domestic violence and violence against women. It welcomed the importance attached to the promotion of gender equality by Albania, but believed that measures could be strengthened in that field. It believed that further attention should be given to services supporting victims of trafficking. Thailand made recommendations. 34. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia urged the Government to further combat domestic violence. It asked about consultations between stakeholders and the Ministry of Local Administration regarding the law on administrative and territorial division, the results thus far and minority groups’ participation in those consultations. It enquired about labour rights policies envisaged for ethno-linguistic and national minorities. It made recommendations. 35. Togo applauded the strengthening of the legal and institutional framework and the adoption of action plans in areas including children’s and women’s rights. It regretted the lapses in the law on discrimination, particularly the non-prohibition of discrimination based on nationality. Togo made a recommendation. 36. Tunisia noted progress in areas such as discrimination, human trafficking, the judiciary and education. It noted efforts to combat domestic violence and encouraged Albania to challenge the stereotypes that fostered such a scourge. It encouraged Albania to intensify its fight against vendetta-related crimes, investigate such crimes and bring the culprits to justice. Tunisia made recommendations. 37. Turkey appreciated efforts to establish democratic institutions. It encouraged Albania to continue to combat domestic violence and to take measures to emancipate women, particularly in the areas of education and employment. It noted the adoption of the law on social services, which would contribute to gender equality. Turkey made recommendations.  38. The United Kingdom welcomed efforts to combat religious extremism, human trafficking and blood feuds. It urged the Government to increase convictions and raise public awareness of domestic violence. It was concerned at inadequate facilities in places of detention for persons with physical disabilities and inadequate care of prisoners with mental health issues. It made recommendations. 39. The United States of America commended the appointment of the national anti-trafficking coordinator. It was concerned at the lack of capacity of the police to address all reported cases of domestic violence. It noted reports of police mistreatment of detained suspects and deplored the engagement of children in the worst forms of labour. The United States made recommendations. 40. Uruguay welcomed the 2012 and 2013 reforms of the Criminal Code. It applauded the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure. It noted efforts to improve the situation of women and achieve gender equality at all levels of public office. Uruguay made recommendations. 41. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela noted the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. It acknowledged efforts to improve the living conditions of the Roma community, including the establishment of preschool facilities. It also noted steps to strengthen legislation regarding domestic violence. It made recommendations. 42. Viet Nam thanked the delegation for updated information on the human rights situation. It noted efforts and achievements made in the field of human rights, including legislative reform following the 2013 elections, capacity-building of human rights institutions, and increased participation in core European and international human rights instruments. Viet Nam made recommendations. 43. Afghanistan praised the adoption and amendment of several laws and strategies and the accession to certain international conventions. It acknowledged steps to improve the justice system, particularly the adoption of the cross-cutting justice strategy to increase access to justice. It appreciated the attention given to the rights of vulnerable persons. Afghanistan made a recommendation. 44. Algeria noted the adoption of legislation regarding discrimination and gender equality. It also noted the ratification of various conventions, including the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. It hoped that the action plan regarding the Roma would promote the rights of that community and that the Criminal Code amendments would strengthen the fight against human trafficking. Algeria made recommendations. 45. Angola congratulated Albania on the legislative reform process, particularly the harmonization of national child protection laws with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and encouraged Albania to strengthen cooperation with human rights mechanisms in that area. It commended efforts in respect of women’s rights, gender equality and violence against women. Angola made a recommendation. 46. Argentina congratulated Albania on the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and welcomed the country’s commitment to respect the rights of persons with disabilities. It applauded the adoption of legislation on protection against discrimination and noted measures taken in the framework of the fight against discrimination. Argentina made recommendations. 47. Australia encouraged Albania to build on the success of the 2013 elections to increase democracy and move towards European integration. It welcomed efforts to address corruption by restricting the immunity of high-level officials. It was concerned at the prevalence of domestic violence and the scarcity of judicial proceedings. It recognized efforts regarding the Roma and Egyptian communities. Australia made recommendations. 48. Austria commended the ratification of various instruments. It was alarmed by reports of discrimination and violence against women. Despite progress, it was concerned about the many Roma children outside education. It asked what steps would be taken to address internal and cross-border human trafficking. Austria made recommendations.  49. Belgium welcomed the broadening of protection against discrimination based on sexual orientation and the introduction of the national strategy for gender equality. Significant challenges remained regarding corruption and the independence of the judiciary. Despite relevant legislation, the situation of women and children was a cause for concern. Belgium made recommendations. 50. Brazil noted with satisfaction the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the national strategy to reduce gender-based violence. It appreciated the creation of the position of Commissioner for Protection from Discrimination and the national action plan for children. It was concerned by provisions which allowed child victims of prostitution to be prosecuted. Brazil made recommendations. 51. Canada asked for information on additional measures envisaged to address trafficking in persons and further strengthen the implementation of relevant laws. It supported measures to combat gender-based violence and noted the adoption of legislation criminalizing sexual violence within marriage, but remained concerned at the lack of mechanisms to bring the perpetrators to justice. Canada made recommendations. 52. China appreciated efforts to implement the recommendations accepted in the previous UPR cycle, including the amendment of legislation regarding women’s and children’s rights, the rights of persons with disabilities, domestic violence, human trafficking, social security, education and health care. It welcomed efforts to implement the action plan on the inclusion of the Roma community. China made recommendations.  53. The Congo praised the strengthening of the legal framework concerning, inter alia, social services, education and the judiciary. It noted the Criminal Code amendments to prevent domestic violence, protect victims and impose harsher sentences on the perpetrators of such violence. It commended the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure. The Congo made recommendations. 54. Costa Rica applauded efforts to align national legislation with international instruments such as the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. It noted measures to strengthen protection against domestic violence. It encouraged Albania to improve legislation concerning human trafficking and the early identification of trafficking victims. It made recommendations. 55. Croatia welcomed various reform measures and steps to improve the efficiency of investigations and prosecutions. It noted efforts to combat corruption and organized crime and the enhancement of legislation regarding discrimination, human trafficking, and children’s and women’s rights. It encouraged Albania to continue to improve the protection of victims of human trafficking and children’s rights. Croatia made recommendations.  56. The Czech Republic welcomed the amendment to the Criminal Code which categorized domestic violence as a crime punishable by imprisonment. It noted that Albanian law provided for public access to government information and acknowledged the considerable progress achieved in the field of the rights of the child. It made recommendations. 57. The delegation of Albania reported that the 2010 Law on the Protection of the Rights of the Child incorporated a clear definition of the child as every person below the age of 18. A new and comprehensive child protection system was functioning to identify all children at risk of exploitation, violence, abuse and neglect. 58. Corporal punishment had been legally banned. The Government was implementing awareness campaigns and capacity-building programmes for various professional groups. The Government was trying to better link the child protection system with the domestic violence referral mechanism by organizing common training of public officers and by integrating social service providers for women and children. 59. In response to questions on domestic violence, the delegation mentioned that recent amendments to the Criminal Code had contributed to a considerable number of prosecutions and it provided some statistics. Capacity-building and training for the police on the application of the amended legislation had assisted those prosecutions. The police had been included in the national referral mechanism to ensure that criminal and social aspects of the problems were addressed. 60. With regard to human trafficking, the authorities had amended the Criminal Code to address problems concerning prosecutions. All stakeholders had been included in training on implementation of the amended legislation. The police had been applying standard operating procedures for the identification of victims of trafficking. The steps to be taken in investigations had been defined in by-laws. The number of victims and potential victims who had been identified and assisted in shelters had increased.  61. The General Directorate of Prisons, in cooperation with Save the Children, had implemented a programme on juvenile justice which included services to support rehabilitation and prepare for the reintegration of children. Activities to support reintegration had focused on empowerment and capacity development as well as the use of coordination networks for the governmental and NGO personnel involved. 62. With respect to mentally ill persons and persons with disabilities in the penitentiary system, an agreement signed between the relevant ministries had set the objective of improving health-service provision, including psychiatric services. That included the creation of a new forensic psychiatric institution to house patients treated under court orders. Specialized units would be included for the treatment of detainees with mental health problems and new institutions would be opened to improve conditions for detained persons with disabilities. 63. In response to questions on the implementation of the recommendations of the Ombudsman, the delegation said that the General Directorate of Prisons had established a working group to monitor the implementation of those recommendations. 64. The Commissioner for Protection from Discrimination had examined complaints alleging discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity and had initiated an ex officio investigation in that field. The delegation provided information on the Commissioner’s decisions and the sanctions imposed, and on training and outreach activities across the country.  The Commissioner’s competencies covered the private as well as the public sector. 65. The Democratic Republic of the Congo noted progress in various areas of national life and improvements to legislation. It applauded the strengthening of the rights of women, children and persons with disabilities. It noted women’s increased participation in public office, and efforts to combat corruption, torture and human trafficking. It made a recommendation. 66. Denmark commended the ratification of the Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence, and legislative amendments in that area. It noted with concern the allegations of torture and ill-treatment of detained persons and encouraged Albania to prevent torture by increasing visits by the national preventive mechanism to detention facilities without prior notification. Denmark made recommendations.  67. Egypt welcomed efforts to strengthen the role of the ombudsman and integrate the Roma community. It commended measures on human trafficking and child protection. It asked for details on the challenges to the effective implementation of legislation concerning domestic violence and women’s political empowerment, and the measures envisaged to address those issues. Egypt made recommendations. 68. Estonia welcomed progress made and encouraged further steps to strengthen the rule of law, including further reforms in the justice sector. Despite improved freedom of expression, further efforts were needed to fully guarantee media independence and the safety of journalists. It encouraged steps to improve good governance and attention to women’s rights, particularly with regard to violence. Noting political polarization, consideration of the Ombudsman’s recommendations and international obligations remained a priority. Estonia made recommendations. 69. France welcomed the delegation of Albania. It applauded the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. France made recommendations. 70. Germany commended the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the creation of the position of Commissioner for Protection from Discrimination and the National Strategy on Gender Equality and Reduction of Gender-based Violence and Domestic Violence for 2011-2015. It remained concerned about the fragmented human rights protection. It asked about steps taken to counter blood feuds, protect potential victims and seek prosecutions. Germany made recommendations. 71. Ghana asked to what extent civil society had participated in the preparation of the national report. It noted the adoption of a cross-cutting strategy to fight corruption but said that anti-corruption efforts should be fully implemented. It urged Albania to continue steps to prevent torture; particularly the enforcement of the Criminal Code regarding deprivation of liberty and humane treatment. 72. Greece encouraged further steps to combat domestic violence. It asked for details on improvements to the protection of minorities in the legislative and policy framework; and on restitution of private property to religious institutions and members of minority groups. It commended the adoption of the law on the registration of immovable property. Greece made a recommendation. 73. Hungary noted positively the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure. It commended the law on measures against violence in family relations, but noted that few protection orders had been granted to victims. It expressed concern at the situation of minority languages and that large numbers of Roma children remained uneducated and illiterate. Hungary made recommendations. 74. Indonesia appreciated efforts to strengthen legal and administrative frameworks for monitoring the promotion and protection of human rights; namely the roles of the Ombudsman and the Commissioner for Protection from Discrimination. However, there remained room for improvement. Indonesia made recommendations. 75. Iraq noted that the report reflected Albania’s desire to promote and enhance fundamental rights and freedoms and uphold them. It commended Albania’s accession to many international instruments and protocols, the latest being the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. That had affirmed Albania’s determination to strengthen international cooperation to protect and promote human rights and meet international standards. 76. Ireland welcomed progress, including in protecting the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons, and asked about the implementation of the previously accepted recommendation to educate police officers on sexual orientation issues. It urged Albania to intensify efforts to prevent violence against women in all its forms. It expressed concern regarding the prevalence of trafficking in persons. Ireland made recommendations. 77. Israel asked what steps were being taken to ensure women’s rights were respected and to end gender-based discrimination. It commended the adoption and amendment of numerous human rights-related laws and by-laws and the ratification of several international conventions and protocols. Israel made a recommendation. 78. Italy particularly appreciated commitments to enhance civil service efficiency and fight corruption. It noted the progress achieved in preventing violence against women. It mentioned recurring blood feud episodes that negatively affected children’s rights. Italy made recommendations. 79. Lithuania welcomed the adoption of the Law on Protection from Discrimination and the appointment of the Commissioner for Protection from Discrimination; the National Strategy on Gender Equality and Reduction of Gender-Based Violence and Domestic Violence for 2011-2015 and the associated law. Steps had to be taken to combat human trafficking. Violence against journalists was a concern. Lithuania made recommendations. 80. Malaysia welcomed progress in implementing UPR recommendations on combating child trafficking, sexual violence and the ill-treatment of women and children. It noted amendments to the Criminal Code to prevent violence against women, and the adoption of strategies relating to gender-based violence and trafficking of children. However, children were still reportedly exploited. Malaysia made recommendations. 81. Maldives highlighted the adoption of new legislation to protect human rights and the amendment of the Criminal Code in line with international standards, notably ensuring harsher punishment of perpetrators of domestic violence. It noted ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which would improve the situation of persons with disabilities. It made recommendations.  82. Mexico recognized Albania’s cooperation with international human rights instruments, including the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure. It applauded the National Strategy on Gender Equality and Reduction of Gender-Based Violence and Domestic Violence for 2011-2015, and hoped that would lead to more convictions and the increased effectiveness of victim protection orders. Mexico made recommendations. 83. Montenegro asked whether further regulations would be implemented to increase women’s participation in government positions, and whether additional measures would be taken to promote the equal participation of national minorities. It highlighted the appointment of the Commissioner for Protection from Discrimination and the adoption of the Law on Protection from Discrimination. It noted efforts to protect women from violence and integrate Roma minorities and LGBT persons. 84. Morocco asked for information regarding the National Strategy on Gender Equality and Reduction of Gender-Based Violence and Domestic Violence, the Action Plan on Children, the National Strategy on Persons with Disabilities, and the Action Plan for the Implementation of the Decade of Roma Inclusion. Morocco made recommendations. 85. The Netherlands welcomed Albania’s commitment to promoting equal rights for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons and preventing discrimination, and hoped that would lead to legislative amendments regarding gender identity, gender expression and hate speech. It expressed concern regarding the impartiality of and access to the judicial system and prevailing attitudes leading to harmful practices such as prenatal sex selection. It made recommendations. 86. Nicaragua noted the implementation of recommendations from the first UPR cycle and the adoption of national strategies of social and economic importance. It expressed concern regarding continuing domestic and sexual violence against women and children and discrimination against minority groups. Nicaragua made recommendations. 87. The Philippines noted Albania’s accession to international instruments, enactment of laws on discrimination and protection of children’s rights and amendments to the Criminal Code. It welcomed efforts to address domestic violence and human trafficking, and action plans to improve access to education and health services and protection for persons with disabilities. It urged continued commitment to human rights, particularly for vulnerable groups. It made recommendations. 88. Poland acknowledged the progress made in developing a legal and institutional human rights framework, including the Commissioner for Protection from Discrimination. It appreciated Albania’s efforts to comply with recommendations accepted during the first UPR cycle, particularly ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Poland made recommendations. 89. Portugal welcomed Albania’s extension of a standing invitation to special procedures of the Human Rights Council. It noted the 2013 amendment to the Criminal Code to widen protection against discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. It remained concerned about violence against and trafficking and sexual abuse of children. Portugal made recommendations. 90. Qatar welcomed efforts to implement recommendations made in the first UPR cycle. It commended the adoption of the Action Plan on Children and the National Action Plan on the Fight against Trafficking in Human Beings. It congratulated Albania on ratifying the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Qatar made recommendations. 91. The Republic of Korea noted new and revised laws and regulations in line with international instruments, and welcomed the establishment of judicial bodies and the appointment of the Commissioner for Protection from Discrimination. It asked about the difference between the work of the latter and the People’s Advocate. It noted the under-representation of women in the public sector and in politics. It made recommendations. 92. The Republic of Moldova requested information regarding ongoing reform of the justice sector, particularly provision of free legal aid. It acknowledged the criminalization of domestic violence and marital rape and the referral mechanism for victims/potential victims of trafficking and asked whether that had increased early identification of victims. It made recommendations. 93. The Russian Federation welcomed the national report presented by Albania and noted the difficult human rights situation in the country. The Russian Federation made recommendations. 94. Rwanda commended the adoption of the National Strategy on Gender Equality and Reduction of Gender-Based Violence and Domestic Violence for 2011-2015. It commended steps to combat corruption, including restricting the immunity of high-level officials. It noted the number of women holding public and political positions. Rwanda made recommendations. 95. Saudi Arabia noted the steps taken to implement recommendations made during the first UPR cycle. It particularly commended efforts to ensure the protection of rights of persons with disabilities, through appropriate legislation and their inclusion in the National Strategy for Development and Integration and the Strategy on Employment and Professional Training. Saudi Arabia made recommendations.  96. Serbia commended improvements to the institutional framework and the capacity of independent institutions, and encouraged further progress. Serbs had been unable to declare their ethnicity during the 2011 census. It urged Albania to adopt a law on national minorities, to ensure that all minorities could exercise their rights equally. Serbia made recommendations. 97. Romania noted that Albania had overcome a history of dictatorship and had made impressive progress in human rights. However, the effective protection and implementation of the rights of persons belonging to minorities remained a priority. The distinction between national and ethno-linguistic minorities could be contrary to the principle of non.discrimination. Romania made recommendations. 98. Responding to questions concerning blood feuds, the delegation of Albania stated that the Government had carried out public awareness campaigns and had worked with NGOs and the National Reconciliation Committee to address the issue. The authorities had been proactive in gathering police intelligence to identify and prevent such crimes, and had provided police protection to families in conflict. As a result, few blood-feud deaths had occurred in 2013. 99. Responding to questions on minority rights, the delegation stated that a road map was being prepared to protect national minorities’ rights. A working group had been established to review existing legislative and institutional frameworks and address complaints from minorities. The working group, comprising the Ombudsman, the Commissioner for Protection from Discrimination and representatives of civil society, would present conclusions and proposals for improvements to the legal framework by the end of 2014. Those proposals would also address the distinction between the two categories of minorities identified. The process to reform property rights would further be completed by the end of 2014. 100. The delegation stated that civil society had been actively involved in various government initiatives and had participated in the monitoring of national institutional bodies. For example, civil society representatives were part of the National Council for Protection of the Rights of the Child, participating in monitoring the child protection system. 101. Albania had joined the global fight against discrimination on the basis of gender and sexual orientation, and measures were being implemented in collaboration with relevant government structures, civil society, international organizations, academia and independent institutions, including legislative review, public awareness activities, and capacity-building among police, social workers and health workers. Awareness-raising activities had previously taken place during the week against homophobia, which had resulted in increased public awareness. There were proposals to amend the Family Code concerning cohabitation for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons, and to amend the Labour Code to broaden the concept of non-discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity in matters of employment and vocational training. 102. In response to the question on overlapping competencies between the People’s Advocate and the Commissioner for Protection from Discrimination, the delegation outlined a number of differences between the two institutions. The People’s Advocate was a constitutional institution, defending the rights of individuals from public administration actions. It made recommendations on such cases and was able to initiate proceedings in a constitutional court. The Commissioner was an independent public institution, ensuring non-discrimination in both the private and public sectors, imposing fines and providing representation for complainants in civil judicial cases. 103. In response to the question on the protection of women’s rights, the delegation gave assurances that the Government’s commitment to continue implementing measures had already been demonstrated. Albania had been one of the first to ratify the Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence and was implementing it, collaborating with NGOs and providing them with funds from the State budget. The Government was also committed to eliminating the gender wage gap, as well as the discrepancy between the content and the implementation of legislation and its implementation in that respect. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations** 104. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue and listed below have been examined by Albania and enjoy the support of Albania: 104.1 Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the ICESCR (Spain); 104.2 Ratify the Optional Protocol to ICESCR (Portugal) (Israel); 104.3 Ratify the Optional Protocol of the CRPD (Austria) (Israel) (Rwanda); 104.4 Consider ratifying the Optional Protocol to the CRPD (Estonia); 104.5 Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the CRPD (Spain); 104.6 Ratify the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (Hungary); 104.7 Ratify ILO Convention No. 189 (Israel); 104.8 Consider ratifying ILO Convention No 2. on Unemployment (Israel); 104.9 Consider ratifying ILO Convention No. 117 on Social Policy (Israel); 104.10 Consider ratifying ILO Convention No. 118 on Equality of Treatment (Israel); 104.11 Effectively integrate the Rome Statute and the Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearances in its domestic legislation (Uruguay); ** The conclusions and recommendations will not be edited. 104.12 Fully align its national legislation with the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC) and the Kampala Amendments, including by incorporating provisions to cooperate promptly and fully with the ICC and to investigate and prosecute genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes effectively before its national courts (Estonia); 104.13 Allocate additional resources in order to further strengthen the work of the Ombudsman’s Office (Sierra Leone); 104.14 Provide the Office of the People’s Advocate with the appropriate financial and human resources and follow up diligently on its recommendations (Tunisia); 104.15 Allocate the necessary resources to fulfil the mandate of the Ombudsman, and ensure compliance of this institution with the Paris Principles (France); 104.16 Strengthen the public impact of the People’s Advocate (Ombudsman) and his capacity to act effectively as a preventive national force also when it comes to sensitive issues such as prosecution of acts of torture (Czech Republic); 104.17 Improve the function of the People’s Advocate by providing the necessary financial assistance and human resources and make efforts to implement the recommendations of the Advocate (Republic of Korea); 104.18 Take measures to facilitate the effective performance of the functions of the Ombudsman, ensuring the adequate provision of financial resources for its work and an appropriate follow-up of its recommendations (Mexico); 104.19 Respond to the recommendations of the Ombudsman without ignoring them (Saudi Arabia); 104.20 Review national legislation and take the necessary legislative measures to ensure that there is no overlap of functions between the Office of the Commissioner for the Protection from Discrimination and the Ombudsman, and consider granting the Ombudsman the necessary financial and human resources to enable it to fulfil its mandate with more efficiency and independence, in accordance with the Paris Principles (Uruguay);  104.21 Strengthen the role and resources of institutions in charge of human rights (Algeria); 104.22 Cooperate with OHCHR in its endeavours to harmonize the domestic legislation with international human rights standards (Turkey); 104.23 Give priority to and allocate resources for implementing current national strategies, programmes and measures, with more focus on addressing the challenges and disparities in employment, education and health care, especially for vulnerable groups of women, children, migrants and the elderly (Viet Nam); 104.24 Continue its efforts through cooperation with civil society and combating stereotypes (Angola); 104.25 Continue to implement effectively the National Action Plan on the Rights of the Child (China); 104.26 Pay particular attention to the conditions of street children in the context of its national policy on providing adequate protection for children (Egypt); 104.27 Strengthen cooperation with human rights bodies, continue to cooperate with the United Nations special procedures and maintain the standing invitation to the thematic procedures mandate holders (Morocco); 104.28 Make stronger efforts to improve and raise the standard of gender equality in society (Nicaragua); 104.29 Ensure equality of women and men in accessing socioeconomic services, including property tenure, and health care and services (Thailand); 104.30 Continue efforts to strengthen the position of women’s role in society and to create employment opportunities for rural women in the context of rural development strategy (Qatar); 104.31 Take necessary measures to speed up gender equality in practice, especially in access to professions, including at the highest level, to property, capital, medical services and housing (Belgium); 104.32 Undertake a gender revision of and amend all laws regulating property rights with a view to ensure equal land and property entitlements for women and men (Austria); 104.33 Take effective measures to accelerate the consolidation of property rights as an aspect of ensuring gender equality (Turkey); 104.34 Take steps to ensure equality between men and women; in particular, take measures to guarantee that women enjoy equal pay for work of equal value as provided by the Labour Code, such as enhancing labour inspection measures and addressing the issue of ineffective implementation of the law, increasing awareness and favouring access to justice for affected women (Canada); 104.35 Adopt and implement further measures in order to address the gender wage gap, improve women’s access to entrepreneurship and ensure a balanced representation of women in the labour market (Italy); 104.36 Put forward its best efforts to ensure women’s empowerment, representation and advancement, especially in the public sector (Republic of Korea); 104.37 Fully implement the Law on Protection from Discrimination and launch a national awareness campaign on the issue of discrimination and racism (Germany); 104.38 Study the possibility of strengthening the measures to fight discrimination, in order to eradicate the trend and/or the dissemination of stereotypes that lead to discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation (Argentina); 104.39 Increase awareness-raising programmes and campaigns to promote tolerance and respect for cultural diversity (Malaysia); 104.40 In accordance with the recommendation of the People’s Advocate, collect and administer accurate data and statistics regarding the blood feud phenomenon (Sweden); 104.41 Instruct police officers on an annual basis that any form of ill-treatment of detained persons is unacceptable and will be punished (United States); 104.42 Prevent all cases of torture and ill-treatment by police, law enforcement officials and in places of detention and ensure effective, independent and impartial investigations in all cases (Germany); 104.43 Continue to enhance programmes to protect children from all forms of violence or abuse (Philippines); 104.44 Continue efforts towards combating violence against women and children (Algeria); 104.45 Continue endeavours aimed at combating domestic violence and ensure that all reports of domestic violence are thoroughly investigated and perpetrators are brought to justice in accordance with the law (Slovakia); 104.46 Continue adopting and implementing robust measures to better address domestic violence, and develop programmes to assist the victims of domestic violence and programmes to assist the victims of domestic violence (Turkey); 104.47 Fully implement the normative framework and related policies aimed at preventing violence against women, in particular by addressing the factors which may still prevent women from filing complaints regarding episodes of violence (Italy); 104.48 Enhance support services for victims of domestic and gender-based violence; and take measures to raise awareness among law enforcement officials, lawyers and judges of the serious nature of domestic and gender-based violence (Australia); 104.49 Provide the necessary support, including adequate shelter, to all victims of domestic violence (Denmark); 104.50 Establish appropriate shelters and social services for victims of domestic violence, as well as a system of victim compensation and reintegration (Ireland); 104.51 Provide the necessary assistance to the victims of domestic violence, including through the adoption of rehabilitation and reintegration programmes (Lithuania); 104.52 Undertake a deep analysis of protection orders for victims of domestic violence that were broken, in order to identify the root causes and take appropriate measures to secure the safety of the victims (Hungary); 104.53 Organize awareness-raising campaigns at the national level, and especially in rural areas, aimed at preventing violence against children at home and in all institutions in which children are present (Croatia); 104.54 Fully implement the National Strategy on Gender Equality and Against Gender-Based and Domestic Violence and build up the capacity of the police force to deal with such cases, including through additional training programs to help police identify and assist survivors of domestic violence (United States of America); 104.55 Take action to effectively prevent and fight violence against women, particularly domestic violence (France); 104.56 Ensure that all reports of domestic violence are thoroughly investigated and that the perpetrators are brought to justice (Lithuania); 104.57 Ensure that cases of domestic violence are properly investigated and prosecuted (Slovenia); 104.58 Ensure that reports of domestic violence are investigated swiftly and fully, and that prosecutions are carried out with the full force of the law (United Kingdom); 104.59 Ensure that all complaints of domestic violence are seriously investigated, with the protection of victims and the prosecution of the perpetrators, in accordance with existing legislation, in particular through raising the awareness of police forces on such issues (Belgium); 104.60 Ensure effective implementation of the measures or strategies established to counter and prevent trafficking in persons, including by intensifying efforts to prosecute perpetrators and providing adequate protection to trafficking victims, especially women and children (Philippines); 104.61 Intensify efforts to effectively implement the measures adopted to combat trafficking in human beings, in particular in terms of victim protection (Poland); 104.62 Continue strengthening its efforts to combat trafficking in persons, including through regional and international cooperation (Egypt); 104.63 Reinforce measures to protect victims of trafficking, with due regard to the special situation of child victims, regardless of whether they have agreed to participate in judicial proceedings (Croatia); 104.64. Consider improving assistance, including medical and social services, and shelter for trafficking victims, particularly women and children (Thailand); 104.65 Take further measures to address the issue of violence against children, including trafficking and sexual abuse (Portugal); 104.66 Take the necessary measures to effectively eliminate the worst forms of child labour (United States of America); 104.67 Take measures to strengthen the monitoring mechanisms to combat child labour and the economic exploitation of minors (Mexico); 104.68 Strengthen efforts aimed at protecting the rights of children in need, children who are victims of labour exploitation and children vulnerable to exploitation and violence (Qatar); 104.69 Strengthen its measures on the elimination of the economic exploitation of children, especially those coming from poor and socially marginalized families (Malaysia); 104.70 Increase efforts to ensure the independence and transparency of the judiciary (Estonia); 104.71 Intensify efforts to enhance the independence, efficiency and accountability of the judiciary (Australia); 104.72 Guarantee the protection of fundamental human rights and freedoms of its citizens by guaranteeing the independence of the judicial bodies, impartiality in decision-making, respecting defendants’ right to fair trial, ensuring access to free legal aid and restoring citizens’ trust in the justice system by fighting impunity (Netherlands); 104.73 Take measures to ensure the independence of the judiciary, in particular by prosecuting and punishing with severe sanctions those responsible for acts undermining the independence or impartiality of judicial proceedings (Belgium); 104.74 Improve facilities in places of detention for people with physical disabilities and improve access to adequate care for prisoners with mental health issues (United Kingdom); 104.75 Effectively fight against torture and ill-treatment, especially in places of detention, ensuring that these acts are the subject of independent investigations and appropriate legal prosecutions, and that the use of preventive detention is exceptional and strictly regulated (France); 104.76 Enforce the provisions of the “Law on legal aid” and ensure that practical procedures to obtain free legal aid are enabling applicants to fully enjoy their rights of access to justice (Republic of Moldova); 104.77 Eliminate or reduce the fees for litigation so that defendants are able to obtain their rights within the law (Saudi Arabia); 104.78 Ensure that any reform of the juvenile justice system explicitly takes into account the differentiated needs of girls and boys (Austria); 104.79 Continue its efforts to ensure the implementation of the principle of the best interest of the child in the juvenile justice system, including by considering  incorporating the restorative justice principle (Indonesia); 104.80 Take all the necessary measures to improve the effectiveness and transparency of efforts aimed at combating corruption, in particular by intensifying its efforts to diligently and rapidly respond to the recommendations and questions of the national ombudsman (Belgium); 104.81 Continue strengthening the institutional and administrative capacities of the civil service while expanding the action against corruption, especially in the health-care, education and judiciary sectors (Italy); 104.82 Continue to provide, in accordance with its obligations under international human rights law, the widest possible protection and support for the family, as the natural and fundamental unit of society (Egypt); 104.83 Ensure greater transparency and broader public access to government information and official documents (Czech Republic); 104.84 Continue ensuring that impartial and effective investigations of attacks against journalists take place and that those responsible are brought to justice (Lithuania); 104.85 Take measures to promote a safe and enabling environment for journalists to perform their work independently and without undue interference (Lithuania); 104.86 Raise awareness of  children’s right to participation in the family and community (Slovenia); 104.87 Integrate specialized and holistic rehabilitation services into the public health system (Denmark); 104.88 Strengthen its human rights education at the national level and through the school system (Republic of Korea); 104.89 Continue implementing programmes to realize the right to education for all, including by increasing budget allocation for education and training programmes for all children in the country (Indonesia); 104.90 Continue strengthening the social protection programmes developed in conformity with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 104.91 Take measures aimed at achieving inclusive education for persons with disabilities, mainly children with disabilities (Argentina); 104.92 Step up its efforts in the promotion and protection of the rights of persons with disabilities in accordance with its obligation under the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, including on the education of children with disabilities (Malaysia); 104.93 Formulate and implement a plan for the integration of people with disabilities into mainstream society (Maldives); 104.94 Continue to communicate with international human rights mechanisms in order to continue its efforts to raise awareness about disabled persons (Saudi Arabia); 104.95 Intensify the dialogue with persons belonging to national minorities on the opportunities for the teaching of and in minority languages and, where appropriate, take the necessary steps to address any shortcomings (Hungary); 104.96 Expand possibilities for the education of minorities, including learning minority languages, promoting identities and supporting minority cultures (Serbia); 104.97 While finalizing the new law on administrative and territorial division, take into full account the European Charter of Local Self-Government of the Council of Europe and article 108, paragraph 2, of the Albanian Constitution (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia); 104.98 Continue making efforts to integrate the rights of the minorities present in the country in its public policies and legislation (Nicaragua); 104.99 Consider adopting comprehensive legislation on national minorities that would address, inter alia, the legal criteria for recognition as a national minority, the institutional framework for addressing minority issues and structuring the dialogue with representatives of national minorities (Serbia); 104.100 Continue the implementation of the national strategy regarding the Roma and the National Action Plan relating to the decade for the inclusion of the Roma (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 104.101 Step up efforts to implement effectively the National Strategy and Action Plan for the Decade of Roma Inclusion with a view to improving the living conditions of the Roma community and, if necessary, to adopt measures to improve the education of Roma children (Slovakia); 104.102 Further strengthen the education measures and policies for the inclusion of Roma students in the education system, and intensify the literacy campaigns for its population (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 104.103 Strengthen efforts to improve access to housing, health services, education and employment for both the Roma and Egyptian communities (Australia); 104.104 Ensure the development of a human rights-based migration policy which guarantees respect of the rights of all migrants (France); 104.105 Take steps to improve the situation of asylum seekers and refugees through, inter alia, discontinuing the practice of detention of unaccompanied children, providing identification documents for refugees and ensuring their access to social assistance, implementing integration and housing programmes, as well as refraining from detaining asylum seekers, except as a last resort (Sierra Leone). 105. The following recommendations enjoy the support of Albania, which considers that they are in the process of implementation: 105.1 Continue its efforts to bring national legislation into conformity with international human rights norms (Morocco); 105.2 Improve the legal framework in the field of human rights, especially the rights of the child, women’s rights, the rights of persons with disabilities and the rights of minorities (Morocco); 105.3 Take further measures for the improvement of the legal framework in the field of human rights, particularly in the areas of children, women and persons with disabilities (Afghanistan); 105.4 Further improve national institutions and human rights infrastructure, including the harmonization of domestic legislation and the legal system with the international and European Union instruments on persons with disabilities, the rights of the child, the prevention of domestic violence and trafficking in persons (Viet Nam); 105.5 Continue to take steps aimed at strengthening the protection of children’s rights, such as further improving the access of children affected by social exclusion, including Roma children, to education and health-care services (Czech Republic); 105.6 Promote and strengthen child protection mechanisms, especially in rural areas, and ensure equal access to education for all children, with a particular focus on children from marginalized groups and minorities (Germany); 105.7 Continue taking the necessary measures of accountability to ensure full compliance in all sectors with the national legislation in the field of gender rights and equality (Uruguay); 105.8 Further increase concrete measures in the framework of the 2011.2015 Strategy and Action Plan for the promotion and protection of gender equality and women’s rights (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 105.9 Fully implement without further delay the provisions of the national action plan on gender equality and domestic violence (Austria); 105.10 Continue to implement effectively the National Strategy for Gender Equality, Reduction of Gender-Based Violence and Domestic Violence (China); 105.11 Increase efforts to tackle domestic violence, gender stereotypes and discrimination on that ground (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia); 105.12 Strengthen the fight against discrimination affecting the Roma minority in access to housing, employment, education, social services and participation in public life (Spain); 105.13 Intensify efforts in the fight against all forms of discrimination, in particular against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons and minorities, by fully implementing the Law on Protection against Discrimination (France); 105.14 Continue to take steps to fully implement the Law on Protection from Discrimination in relation to discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity (Portugal); 105.15 Strengthen efforts and remain vigilant on the issue of blood feuds (Turkey); 105.16 Take effective measures to combat cases of blood feuds and follow up those measures (Saudi Arabia); 105.17 Ensure the full application of the prohibition of torture and ill treatment (Tunisia); 105.18 Ensure the strict implementation of the prohibition of torture and ill-treatment, especially in pretrial detention, and improve the conditions of detention in conformity with the international standards (Costa Rica); 105.19 Create a national strategy related to combating domestic violence against women and children (Russian Federation); 105.20 Promote a comprehensive policy of sensitization to the fight against domestic violence (Nicaragua); 105.21 Provide necessary legal protection and practical assistance for victims of violence against women (Poland); 105.22 Ensure adequate training of police in order to increase their capability to deal with domestic violence cases, and take further steps to raise public awareness of domestic violence as a criminal offence (Czech Republic); 105.23 Strengthen the legislation and the national action plan to fight trafficking in persons, in order to end the sexual exploitation of children (France); 105.24 Take further measures to effectively combat trafficking in human beings, especially with regard to vulnerable groups such as women and children (Slovenia); 105.25 Continue efforts to combat human trafficking (Lithuania); 105.26 Implement the normative framework in order to ensure protection of the victims of trafficking (Lithuania); 105.27 Ensure early identification of victims of trafficking and provide adequate medical, legal and social assistance, including shelter (Republic of Moldova); 105.28 Reform the penitentiary system with a view to ensuring humane conditions in detention, in line with the international standards (Russian Federation); 105.29 Prevent more effectively racially motivated or xenophobic offences, investigate those cases and prosecute the perpetrators (Tunisia); 105.30 Prevent effectively infractions with a racist or xenophobic motivation, conduct investigations and bring the perpetrators to justice (Togo); 105.31 Adopt legislation on the restitution of the properties confiscated during the communist period (Romania); 105.32 Increase the number of women in political and public life in both national and local government bodies and address gender stereotypes that perpetrate discrimination against women (Rwanda), 105.33 That the Parliament, the Government and all political parties take concrete steps to create a more enabling environment for Albanian women to advance in political and public positions (Sweden); 105.34 Take effective measures to reduce the high dropout rate in primary schools, in particular with regard to Roma children (Slovenia); 105.35 Take measures to effectively address the high dropout rates from school, especially of girls in primary education (Portugal); 105.36 Conduct outreach programmes in rural areas in order to ensure that women with disabilities are not discriminated against or socially excluded (Maldives); 105.37 Continue to raise awareness of the needs of the Roma population, in particular children, and establish an adequate system that provides for their social and educational inclusion (Austria). 106. The following recommendations will be examined by Albania, which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-seventh session of the Human Rights Council, in September 2014: 106.1 Review national legislation to ensure that all persons under 18 have the protections accorded by the Convention on the Rights of the Child, including clarifying the definition of the child (Costa Rica); 106.2 Strengthen monitoring mechanisms which address incidents of forced child labour and further combat the trafficking of children (Sierra Leone); 106.3 Take the necessary measures and adopt the laws that are needed to allow better protection of children’s rights (Switzerland); 106.4 Continue strengthening measures which favour full gender equality, paying special attention to the integration of women into the labour market without discrimination, in line with the measures established in the 2013 European Union Progress Report (Spain); 106.5 Develop programmes and policies that foster norms and attitudes of zero tolerance for harmful and discriminatory attitudes towards gender, including the preference for sons, which can result in harmful and unethical practices such as prenatal sex selection (Netherlands); 106.6 Ensure strict implementation of its new legislation on discrimination, as well as adopt new provisions prohibiting also discrimination based on nationality (Switzerland); 106.7 End the discriminations against the Roma and Egyptian communities, and grant minority status to the Egyptian community (Switzerland); 106.8 Devote primary attention to the protection of the children involved in episodes of blood feud, so as to ensure the full protection and enjoyment of their rights (Italy); 106.9 Given the deep-rooted traditions of the Albanian society, adopt an appropriate regulation relating to acts of vendetta/blood feud in the family and ensure that the perpetrators of such crimes are punished (Congo); 106.10 Implement more efficiently the existing laws which prohibit the corporal punishment of children (Spain); 106.11 Continue with efforts to combat violence against women and take additional measures to reduce violence by addressing the reasons for the withdrawal of many protection order petitions in cases of domestic violence, and ensuring that all reports of domestic violence are thoroughly investigated and that the perpetrators are brought to justice in accordance with the law (Canada); 106.12 Further reinforce its legislation to combat internal and cross-border trafficking in persons, by revising the Criminal Code to adequately sanction the perpetrators of trafficking and exploitation of the victims of trafficking (Ireland); 106.13 Strengthen the legislation to fight trafficking in persons, especially women and children, ensuring the due punishment of the perpetrators of such crimes and the provision of legal and psychological assistance to victims (Mexico); 106.14 Reinforce national legislation and policies to combat human trafficking, in particular sex trafficking, and child labour exploitation (Brazil); 106.15 Amend the Criminal Code in order to for it to contain a specific provision stating that a child victim of prostitution should not be prosecuted and criminalizing the offences of offering, obtaining and providing a child for prostitution (Brazil); 106.16 Take measures to ensure effective guarantee of due process and access to a lawyer in cases of arrest by investigating and preventing any incidents of arbitrary detention and allegations of abuse of authority, including any allegations of corruption among law enforcement personnel (Canada); 106.17 Strengthen the programmes developed to promote employment, food provision and social assistance in favour of national minorities and other vulnerable sectors of the population, in the fight against poverty and social inequality (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 106.18 Guarantee the rights of minorities, elaborate and implement a legal and regulatory framework for the respect and protection of vulnerable populations (Congo); 106.19 Include in the future census a question on national ethnicity (Serbia); 106.20 Consider alternative ways to ensure that members of national and/or ethno-linguistic minorities can officially uphold their identity, thus safeguarding the respect of their relevant rights (Greece); 106.21 Abolish any possible legal grounds for differentiated treatment between national and ethno-linguistic minorities and ensure equal access in practice to rights for persons belonging to all minorities throughout Albania, especially the right of education in and teaching of the minority languages (Romania); 106.22 Adopt a law for the protection of national minorities, in particular in the area of ensuring teaching of and instruction in their mother tongue (Russian Federation); 106.23 Implement the measures contained in the resolution recently adopted by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on the implementation by Albania of the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities, in particular those relating to the right of self-identification of minorities in the census processes and creating conditions for education in minority languages, including Macedonian, on the entire territory of the State (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia). 107. All the conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex 
[English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of Albania was headed by Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative to the United Nations Office and other International Organizations at Geneva, Filloreta Kodra and composed of the following members: • Mrs. Brunilda Minarolli (Peci), Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mrs. Migena Baholli, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mrs. Kaliro	 Martiko, the Office of the Commissioner for the Protection from Discrimination; • Mrs. Ina Verzivolli, Ministry of Social Welfare and Youth; • Mrs. Etleva Sheshi, Ministry of Social Welfare and Youth; • Mrs. Blerta Doci, General Directorate of Prisons; • Mrs. Klodiana Tane, Ministry of Education and Sport; • Mr. Harilla Goga, Minister Counsellor, Permanent Mission of Albania to UNOG; • Mr. Fatjon Demneri, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of Albania to UNOG; • Mr. Redi Voshtina, Ministry of Interior Affairs. 