Distr.: General 2 April 2014 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty–sixth session Agenda item 6 Universal periodic review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Chile * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.14-12897 *1412897* 
Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–120 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–14 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 15–120 4 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 121–123 13  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 25 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its eighteenth session from 27 January to 7 February 2014. The review of Chile was held at the 3rd meeting on 28 January 2014. The delegation of Chile was headed by Bruno Baranda, Minister of Social Development. At its 10th meeting held on 31 January 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on Chile. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Chile: Cuba, Montenegro and Pakistan. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Chile: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/CHL/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commission for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/CHL/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/18/CHL/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Germany, Mexico, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Slovenia, Sweden and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Chile through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation considered that the universal periodic review marked a major step forward towards the universalization of human rights. Chile attributed a high priority to the implementation of its recommendations. The national report showed the progress that had been made in fulfilment of the recommendations received in 2009. 6. Various ministries and public services participated in the preparation of the report. Those institutions were also represented on the high-level delegation that travelled to Geneva for the review. 7. Meetings were also held with the national institute of human rights and with representatives of civil society for the preparation of the report. OHCHR also provided valuable assistance. 8. In 2009, Chile had accepted 71 recommendations. Most of them had been implemented or were under implementation. Even though there were remaining challenges, the second report focused on the efforts made by the State to modernize and strengthen the human rights institutional infrastructure. 9. The delegation highlighted some of the most relevant human rights measures undertaken in the last four and a half years, which were covered by the recommendations accepted in 2009. 10. In 2009, Chile had ratified the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearances (CPED). The National Institute for Human Rights had also been established in 2009. It had been accorded “A” status in 2012, constituting the backbone of the institutional improvement of human rights in Chile. 11. Regarding discrimination, Law No. 20.609 had entered into force in July 2012. The law punished all forms of discrimination based, inter alia, on grounds of race, nationality, language, political opinion, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity and disability. 12. Chile was aware of its historical debt towards its indigenous peoples. The Government had therefore established a policy in 2010 to open a dialogue with the nine indigenous peoples present in the country, in order to ensure their access to development opportunities, with full respect for their rights, traditions, identity and culture. The need for a comprehensive and inclusive approach had led to the creation of the Council of Ministers for Indigenous Affairs. 13. The implementation of international Labour Organization (ILO) Convention 169 (1989) concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries had deepened the commitment to indigenous communities regarding participation and involvement. Since its entry into force, more than 43 consultations had been carried out on matters related to draft legislation, administrative measures and investment projects. One of the most relevant consultations had involved discussion of the procedure and stages of future consultations. During nearly three years, over 300 workshops, involving a direct dialogue between government authorities and indigenous leaders, had been conducted. Having established the new consultation procedure, the Government would apply this mechanism in relation to three relevant issues: the constitutional recognition of the indigenous peoples, the creation of a council representing them and the design of a new institutional framework for a more efficient implementation of public policies regarding them. 14. During the examination, the delegation acknowledged the questions put forward by various countries, which would be answered during the course of the review. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 15. During the interactive dialogue, 84 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 16. The Congo applauded the strengthening of the institutional and legal framework for the protection and promotion of human rights, in particular the creation of a national human rights institution, and the adoption of the act on trafficking in persons. It made a recommendation. 17. Croatia asked Chile to share additional information on the national health-care system for transgender persons. It also asked about the training of the police on human rights and in what way that had contributed to the promotion of the rights of indigenous peoples. 18. Cuba highlighted efforts to eliminate discrimination, particularly Law No. 20.609. It was concerned at the increased use of force by the police during peaceful demonstrations and at the negative effects of the anti-terrorist law on the rights of indigenous peoples. Cuba made recommendations. 19. Cyprus noted reports of inappropriate use of anti-riot weapons by the police during demonstrations. It inquired about the measures taken to ensure a civilian investigation of alleged human rights abuses by the police. Cyprus made a recommendation. 20. The Czech Republic commended Chile for terminating the jurisdiction of the military courts over civilians, as recommended at the last review. It made recommendations. 21. Mauritania commended all the efforts by Chile to enhance the role of its human rights institutions and the implementation of various initiatives designed to promote and protect human rights. Mauritania noted the establishment of the National Institute for Human Rights and the adoption of the appropriate measures to prohibit all forms of discrimination against women. 22. Ecuador acknowledged the efforts to promote and protect the rights of persons with disabilities, refugees and older persons. It congratulated Chile for promoting the integration of migrant workers and their access to social security. Ecuador made recommendations. 23. Egypt noted the extensive consultations held during the preparation of the report and the establishment of the National Institute for Human Rights as an independent legal body. It made recommendations. 24. Estonia welcomed the incentives to raise the participation of women in political life. It was, however, concerned about the criminalization of abortion. It encouraged Chile to continue its efforts to ensure the rights of the child and of indigenous peoples. It made recommendations. 25. Ethiopia welcomed the establishment of the National Institute for Human Rights and commended the active participation of Chile in the Human Rights Council. It appreciated the measures taken to tackle human trafficking and promote and protect the rights of migrants. It made recommendations. 26. Finland asked what action had been taken, or was planned, to legalize abortion, at least in cases where the life of the woman was in danger, or the pregnancy was the consequence of sexual abuse of a child or rape. Finland made recommendations. 27. France welcomed the implementation by Chile of most of the recommendations made in the first cycle and the ratification of CPED. France made recommendations. 28. Germany welcomed progress towards the implementation of the recommendations made during the first cycle, but expressed concern regarding the implementation of human rights standards in certain areas. Germany made recommendations. 29. Ghana noted that the report had been prepared through an open and consultative process and encouraged Chile to address the remaining challenges so as to ensure respect for human rights and the rule of law. It made a recommendation. 30. Greece requested further information on the results of measures taken to ensure that persons with disabilities enjoyed equal opportunities and social inclusion, and on the restitution of lands belonging to indigenous peoples. Greece made recommendations. 31. Guatemala welcomed the anti-discrimination law and the law criminalizing trafficking in persons. It appreciated the policy on the integration of migrants. Guatemala requested information about the establishment of the Council of Ministers on Indigenous Affairs. It made a recommendation. 32. The Holy See congratulated Chile on its commitment to the defence of human rights. It welcomed the implementation of various programmes to eradicate child labour and to promote access to social security and education. The Holy See made recommendations. 33. Honduras praised the actions taken by Chile to combat violence against children, including child labour and the commercial sexual exploitation of children, and the amendment to the regulations of the act on adolescent criminal responsibility. Honduras made recommendations. 34. Hungary was concerned that national legislation was not yet fully aligned with the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and that corporal punishment was not fully prohibited. It requested details on how and when the Government intended to address the problem of the lack of policies on the elimination of child labour. Hungary made recommendations. 35. Indonesia appreciated the tireless efforts made by Chile to promote and protect human rights and in particular to increase the protection of women, but it also believed that those efforts could be further strengthened. It made recommendations. 36. The Islamic Republic of Iran thanked Chile for the information concerning the implementation of the previous recommendations but expressed concern at a number of issues requiring clarification. It made recommendations. 37. Iraq welcomed the ratification of CPED and the introduction of the act on the protection of refugees. It commended measures to combat discrimination and to enhance the participation of citizens in public administration. Iraq made a recommendation. 38. Ireland was concerned about inconsistencies between the legal framework for, and the monitoring in practice of, employment conditions for domestic workers. It applauded efforts to combat domestic violence. It made recommendations. 39. Italy welcomed the adoption of the act on trafficking in persons and amendments to the Penal Code concerning domestic violence. It asked whether measures regarding the legal recognition of transgender persons were envisaged. Italy made recommendations. 40. Jordan commended ongoing efforts to protect human rights and fundamental freedoms, particularly through the adoption of an act on combating discrimination, and appreciated the steps taken to strengthen the institutional framework. Jordan made recommendations. 41. Libya welcomed the report and appreciated all the efforts made and initiatives undertaken, including the establishment of the National Institute for Human Rights. It urged Chile to take steps to organize awareness-raising campaigns on human rights. 42. Liechtenstein acknowledged the efforts made to end discrimination against women and to promote women’s rights, and the commitment to international justice. It noted that the corporal punishment of children remained lawful in the home and in care institutions. It made recommendations. 43. Madagascar welcomed the creation of the National Institute for Human Rights, the ratification of the Statute of Rome and of CPED. It also noted the progress made by Chile in several fields, including the combat against all forms of discrimination, torture and poverty, the protection of vulnerable groups, indigenous peoples, women and children. Madagascar made recommendations. 44. Malaysia commended Chile for strengthening its institutional and legislative framework, for establishing a national human rights institution in 2009, for the progress made in improving women’s rights and for the entering into force of legislation on trafficking in persons in 2011. Malaysia made recommendations. 45. Djibouti congratulated Chile for its permanent engagement in all human rights and for having implemented most of the recommendations received during the first cycle. Djibouti made recommendations. 46. Mexico applauded efforts to prepare for the review, which had included civil society. It recognized the progress that had been made regarding the application of ILO Convention No. 169 and the structures set up to strengthen the participation of indigenous peoples in public life. Mexico made recommendations. 47. Montenegro acknowledged the commitment to improving the situation of indigenous people through, inter alia, programmes for health care and education for indigenous women. Montenegro asked for information concerning activities to promote inclusiveness and the participation of vulnerable groups, whether the Government intended to re-examine the definition of abortion as a criminal offence and about the abolition of the death penalty for all crimes. Montenegro made recommendations. 48. Morocco requested further information on the bill on the rights of migrants and on its added value in relation to existing legislation and the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families. It commended Chile for establishing a national human rights institution. Morocco made recommendations. 49. The Netherlands welcomed the efforts made by Chile to promote equal rights for persons belonging to lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender groups. It hoped that the universal periodic review would assist the Government to promote human rights further. The Netherlands made recommendations. 50. Nicaragua praised the adoption of the acts on discrimination and on civic participation. It recognized progress on gender equality and urged Chile to incorporate recommendations made at the current review into its plan on equal opportunities. Nicaragua made recommendations. 51. Norway encouraged Chile to strengthen its institutional framework to address discrimination. It expressed concern at reports of disproportionate police violence towards minors and members of the indigenous population during social protests, including sexual abuse. Norway made recommendations. 52. Oman commended the increased numbers of women in parliament and in employment. It noted measures to protect children from violence and the introduction of an act on the social inclusion of persons with disabilities. Oman made a recommendation. 53. Paraguay applauded the introduction of various public policies aimed at women, children and indigenous peoples. It expressed concern at existing gender equalities, including the burden of domestic work on women and the pay gap. Paraguay made recommendations. 54. Peru applauded the creation of the National Institute for Human Rights, the adoption of the act on discrimination and the increase in resources allocated to the education sector. Peru made recommendations. 55. The Philippines welcomed the proposal to create the office of the undersecretary for human rights and acknowledged the increasing political participation of women and the extensive consultation process that had been held with indigenous peoples. The Philippines made recommendations. 56. Poland appreciated efforts undertaken to comply with the recommendations accepted during the first cycle, in particular the creation of the National Institute for Human Rights. Poland made recommendations. 57. Portugal welcomed the standing invitation to special procedures mandate holders and the establishment of the National Institute for Human Rights. It applauded the ratification of the Rome Statute and the signature of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure. Portugal made recommendations. 58. The Republic of Moldova encouraged Chile to expedite the establishment of the office of the undersecretary for human rights, with a view to adopting a national human rights plan. It made recommendations. 59. Romania commended Chile on its standing invitation to special procedures mandate holders. It requested further details on the potential prosecutions of those responsible for serious human rights violations during the dictatorship. Romania made recommendations. 60. The Russian Federation noted the amendments made to legislation, in particular regarding the protection of children and the fight against discrimination. It expressed concern at the continued trafficking in persons, including for the sale of organs. The Russian Federation made recommendations. 61. Singapore noted the progress made in combating domestic violence through the enactment of laws and the establishment of re-education centres for men and shelters for victims. Singapore welcomed the achievements in the field of education, with the enrolment rate for basic education reaching 94 per cent in rural areas. Singapore made recommendations. 62. Slovakia encouraged Chile to accelerate preparation of the national human rights plan. It welcomed the developments regarding the rights of women and noted that further efforts were needed to address inequalities, such as unequal employment opportunities, effectively. Slovakia made recommendations. 63. Slovenia encouraged ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (OP-CEDAW). It expressed concern that abortion was outlawed under all circumstances and noted that there was significant prison overcrowding and a lack of prison infrastructure. Slovenia made recommendations. 64. South Sudan noted with appreciation the excellent cooperation between the Chilean police and the International Committee of the Red Cross and encouraged the promotion of a human rights culture for other law enforcement institutions. It made a recommendation. 65. Spain congratulated Chile on being a party to the core international human rights instruments and on ratifying CPED. It made recommendations. 66. Sri Lanka noted the efforts made by Chile to achieve gender equality, promote the rights of women and combat child labour and the commercial sexual exploitation of children. It highlighted the entry into force of the Anti-Discrimination Act in 2012. Sri Lanka made recommendations. 67. The State of Palestine welcomed the determination of Chile to improve the quality of life of its people and foster a culture of respect and non-discrimination. It commended the progress made in education, including improving the quality and making primary education compulsory. It made recommendations. 68. Sweden noted that the criminalization of abortion in all circumstances was still in place. Sweden welcomed advances in promoting lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex rights, particularly the adoption of the Anti-Discrimination Act. It requested more information on the steps taken to ensure the implementation of current anti-discrimination legislation. Sweden made recommendations. 69. Switzerland noted with satisfaction the progress achieved in combating discrimination and violence against women, in reforming the military justice system  and in amendments to anti-terrorist legislation. It was concerned that abortion was criminalized under all circumstances. It made recommendations. 70. Thailand commended the establishment of the National Institute for Human Rights and progress in improving the situation of indigenous peoples. Noting that the Anti-Discrimination Act provided protection for sexual orientation and gender identity, it encouraged a further amendment to include financial compensation for victims. Thailand made recommendations. 71. Trinidad and Tobago commended Chile for the establishment in 2009 of the National Institute for Human Rights, the ratification of the Statute of Rome, the entry into force of Law No. 20.609 in 2012 addressing discrimination, the efforts undertaken for the empowerment of women and the creation of a human rights department within the Carabineros de Chile police force. Trinidad and Tobago made recommendations. 72. Tunisia noted the considerable progress made, notably the adoption of the Anti-Discrimination Act, the Civic Participation Act and the Equal Opportunities Plan 2011– 2020, and the creation of a human rights department within the Carabineros de Chile. It made recommendations. 73. Turkey commended the efforts made by Chile to establish the office of the undersecretary for human rights and the steps taken towards gender equality. It asked what measures had been taken to increase the participation of women in the work force. It made a recommendation. 74. The United Arab Emirates welcomed the progress made in the protection of the human rights of women and children. It sought clarification on the role played by civil society groups. It made a recommendation. 75. The United Kingdom was concerned at reports of excessive use of violence by the police during social protests. It encouraged consultations with indigenous groups on potential development projects directly affecting them. It made recommendations. 76. The United States of America recognized the progress in addressing domestic violence, including awareness-raising programmes, but remained concerned at its high rate of occurrence. It asked how Chile was working to fulfil its international commitments concerning indigenous peoples. It made recommendations. 77. Uruguay welcomed advances in human rights, such as the ratification of CPED and the Rome Statute, and the adoption of the Anti-Discrimination Act, the Civic Participation Act, new legislation on gender violence and policies on older persons. It made recommendations. 78. Uzbekistan highlighted the concern of the treaty bodies over the rights of indigenous peoples. It also highlighted the low level of political participation by women and their literacy rates, prison overcrowding and the excessive use of force in prisons. It made recommendations. 79. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela noted the establishment of the National Institute for Human Rights. It urged Chile to give priority to indigenous peoples and vulnerable groups, including through implementation of ILO Convention No. 169, and to continue its efforts to reduce inequalities and ensure social inclusion. 80. Viet Nam noted with interest the encouraging human rights achievements in Chile, such as the ratification of most of the core human rights treaties, the adoption of the Anti-Discrimination Act and the establishment of the National Institute for Human Rights. It made recommendations. 81. Yemen welcomed the efforts made by Chile to promote the international human rights instruments and the establishment of the National Institute for Human Rights in keeping with the Principles relating to the Status of National Institutions (Paris Principles). It made a recommendation. 82. Afghanistan was pleased by the measures for the reintegration of young people, especially the implementation of the so-called “Plan for youth”, and by the positive steps taken regarding the rights to health and education for migrants. Afghanistan made a recommendation. 83. Algeria welcomed the establishment of the National Institute for Human Rights  in keeping with the Paris Principles and the measures taken to improve the situation of indigenous peoples, especially in the areas of employment and the empowerment of women. It made recommendations. 84. Angola welcomed the establishment of the National Institute for Human Rights and the intention of the Government to harmonize national legislation with international human rights instruments. It welcomed the steps taken that were conducive to improving the lives of indigenous peoples and vulnerable groups. It made a recommendation. 85. Argentina commended the ratification of CPED, the efforts to establish the office of the undersecretary for human rights and the new anti-discrimination legislation. It asked Chile to share its good practice on policies for older persons with the Independent Expert on the enjoyment of all human rights by older persons. It made recommendations. 86. Australia stressed the importance of ongoing human rights education and accountability measures to address allegations of the excessive use of force by the security forces. It encouraged continued efforts to address discrimination and inequality. It made recommendations. 87. Austria asked how Chile intended to address prison overcrowding, mistreatment, unjustified punishment and the lack of an effective youth protection programme, and for information on the status of the draft law on the protection of minors. It made recommendations. 88. Azerbaijan noted the establishment of the National Institute for Human Rights in accordance with the Paris Principles. It shared the concerns of the Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples regarding the rights of indigenous peoples, including the purchase of their ancestral lands. It made recommendations. 89. Bangladesh asked about the actions taken to implement recommendations 60 and 62 of the first cycle to address socioeconomic disparities between the indigenous and non-indigenous populations and to increase the political representation of indigenous peoples. Bangladesh made recommendations. 90. Belarus welcomed the steps taken to promote and protect human rights, the rule of law, socioeconomic rights and non-discrimination. It noted efforts to promote the rights of indigenous peoples and improve their socioeconomic situation. Belarus made recommendations. 91. Belgium congratulated Chile on the adoption of the Anti-Discrimination Act. It had several concerns, especially regarding the situation of women and girls, impunity, torture and enforced disappearances. Belgium made recommendations. 92. Bhutan noted the substantive increase in the budget for the education sector, focusing on the improvement in standards of learning and educational facilities in rural areas. Bhutan also noted the work carried out by the National Service for Women in ensuring the protection of women against domestic violence and in combating child labour. Bhutan made a recommendation. 93. The Plurinational State of Bolivia made recommendations in the constructive spirit that characterizes the universal periodic review. 94. Bosnia and Herzegovina commended the adoption of new human rights legislation and welcomed the establishment of the National Institute for Human Rights in accordance with the Paris Principles. It requested more information on the mandate, operation and financing of that body. 95. Brazil commended the ratification of CPED and encouraged Chile to ratify OP.CEDAW. It welcomed the entry into force of new legislation on trafficking in persons, the rights of refugees and persons with disabilities. Brazil made recommendations. 96. Bulgaria took positive note of the introduction of new measures on equality aimed at prohibiting all forms of discrimination against women, although a definition of discrimination against women in accordance with CEDAW was still missing. Bulgaria made a recommendation. 97. Canada commended recent amendments to the Penal Code to facilitate prosecutions of violence against women. It requested information on other specific measures that would be taken to prevent violence against women or to assist victims. It made recommendations. 98. China commended the steps taken to combat discrimination and strengthen judicial protection, and the adoption of legislation to raise the status of women, protect the rights of older persons and improve the socioeconomic rights of indigenous peoples. It made recommendations. 99. Colombia commended Chile on the strengthening of its institutions, the ratification of the Rome Statute, the adoption of the Anti-Discrimination Act and its role in the Human Rights Council. It made recommendations. 100. The Delegation of Chile emphasized that the new anti-discrimination legislation (Law No. 20.609) was a milestone and the first regulation explicitly punishing acts of discrimination. In compliance with this law, a non-discrimination policy had been recently approved in order to protect and promote human rights without any discrimination. Its implementation was safeguarded by the Observatory on Citizen Participation and Non-Discrimination. 101. The Human Rights Department of the police (Carabineros) had been set up in 2011 with the aim of, inter alia, promoting human rights within its domain and contributing to training on human rights. The Department had updated several police protocols on the use of force and firearms. In 2013, the unit for education, doctrine and the history of the police had implemented a new human rights training programme, in accordance with relevant international standards, on the use of force and the protection of vulnerable groups, including the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender population. 102. In 2012, the tactics of the Carabineros for the maintenance of public order had been updated and a new model for the use of force established, based on the universal principles of legality, necessity and proportionality. In 2013, several protocols on police intervention had been reviewed in order to protect the right to freedom of assembly. 103. The National Institute for Human Rights had supervised interventions by the police during public demonstrations, including the conditions of detention inside police vehicles and in 2012 the Internal Affairs Department had been placed under the General Inspectorate, with the aim of strengthening the internal supervision and control of the Carabineros. Likewise, the people affected by police behaviour had been afforded the possibility to access an Internet complaints system. 104. The delegation reiterated its permanent commitment to human rights when applying the anti-terrorist legislation (Law No. 18.314), which had been amended numerous times since the return to democracy, in order to restrict its scope of application. The delegation emphasized that this legislation had been implemented without any discrimination. 105. Turning to criminal legislation, the delegation stressed that a new draft of the Penal Code would soon be presented to Parliament, which would involve the derogation of article 373 of the Code. 106. The delegation reported that, in 2010, an amendment to the military justice system had been adopted, limiting the scope of military jurisdiction, so that only military personnel could be brought to trial by military courts. It noted, however, that this was an ongoing review process. 107. Regarding the right to land of indigenous peoples, in the last three years, the Government had returned more than 49,360 hectares to indigenous peoples, estimating that 100 per cent of the land currently being claimed would be returned to them within the next six years. The Government had focused not only on the restitution of land as such, but had also complemented it with a productive development strategy, by providing financial and human resources and technical assistance, and in particular investing resources in water management. 108. Despite the fact that a full consensus had not been reached on certain areas of the consultation process with indigenous peoples, the relevant aspects of the procedures, subjects, stages and deadlines had been agreed. The new regulation would enter into force soon, which was a step forward. It would be different to the current regulation, in that it would not only be the right to land which would be the subject of consultations. Consequently, indigenous people, whose traditions, customs and religious, cultural and spiritual practices had been affected, would also be entitled to a prior consultation process. Likewise, the current regulation on the assessment of environmental impact – in force since December 2013 – also incorporated special provisions for consultation when an investment project had an impact on indigenous peoples, rather than on the environment. 109. The delegation noted that the Amnesty Law, although still formally in force, had not been used by the courts since 1998. Currently, more than 1,000 legal proceedings pertaining to human rights violations were ongoing and the Ministry of Interior was a prosecutorial party in 800 of them. Additionally, since 2012, the Supreme Court had decided to stay the use of the statute of limitations in cases of serious, massive and systematic violations of human rights perpetrated during the dictatorship. 110. The Government had established several programmes of reparation for victims who qualified for them: inter alia, pensions for the spouses, mothers, fathers or children of victims, bonuses and scholarships for the children of victims and exemption from compulsory military service. Also, on the fortieth anniversary of the military coup, the Government had ordered the closure of a detention centre used exclusively by former members of the security forces. 111. In recent decades, Chile had become a major destination of international migration. To facilitate the integration of the immigrant community, the Government had encouraged a process of regularization. 112. Moreover, in 2010 the Refugee Protection Act had been adopted, incorporating the international commitments undertaken by Chile. In 2011, a law defining the smuggling of migrants and trafficking of persons as a crime had been enacted and in 2013, a bill on immigration had been sent to parliament after an extensive process of consultation between the State and civil society. That bill, which should be adopted without delay, would replace the Immigration Act of 1975. 113. Chile was about to establish the office of the undersecretary for human rights. A bill was in its second legislative process in the Chamber of Deputies. Once established, the office would be able to draw up a national human rights plan, fulfilling that commitment. 114. As for the national mechanism for the prevention of torture, the Government had been working with the National Institute for Human Rights in order to implement it as swiftly as possible. In addition, the draft of the Penal Code that the executive branch would submit in March 2014 would incorporate a definition of the crime of torture. 115. The fight against domestic violence had been a priority for Chile. In 2010, the law that defines femicide as a crime had been approved, increasing the penalties for former spouses and partners of the victims. The programme “Chile acoge” (“Chile embraces”) sought to reduce violence against women by paying more attention to the victims and to prevention in children and adolescents. It also included the rehabilitation of men who used violence against their partners and the protection of women who suffered sexual violence or had been victims of the crime of trafficking. In this context, the number of femicides had been reduced from 57 cases in 2008 to 34 in 2012 and 40 in 2013. 116. The State promoted the reconciliation of family obligations and work responsibilities, as well as the sharing of responsibilities between parents in the care of children, so that women would have more opportunities for work and personal development. Some of the policies worth mentioning that had been implemented were the extension of postnatal leave from three to six months, the law establishing the shared care of children and the increased coverage of day care and preschool education by over 100,000 places. In addition, 54 per cent of the 840,000 jobs created in the past four years were for women; the rate of female labour participation had reached 48 per cent and the female unemployment rate had decreased to a historical low, from 10.3 per cent in 2009 to 6.2 per cent in 2013. 117. Regarding abortion, the Constitution protected the life of the unborn, so that any action to terminate a pregnancy was prohibited and punished. However, in exceptional instances, where the mother’s life was in danger, the law allowed physicians to perform treatments that were necessary to save the life of the mother, even when the life or integrity of the child was affected as a necessary and secondary consequence. 118. Chile had promoted various initiatives to improve conditions for persons deprived of their liberty. A first step was a plan of 11 measures, which included a significant investment to address problems of infrastructure, security, housing and health. Hence, overcrowding in prisons had been reduced to 25 per cent in 2013. Since 8.7 per cent of the prison population was female, the Government had developed a prison policy with a gender perspective. 119. The delegation concluded by thanking those delegations which had intervened; opinions, recommendations and constructive criticism were invaluable for assessing progress and challenges in the promotion and protection of human rights in Chile. The delegation sought to answer as many questions as possible and pledged to respond in writing to those that had not been addressed for lack of time. 120. Chile had made progress in building a culture of respect, promotion and protection of human rights but major challenges remained. The Government took them seriously and, in this context, acknowledged the importance of the universal periodic review mechanism and the recommendations derived from it, being aware that they would contribute to a more just and equitable society. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations** 121. The following recommendations will be examined by Chile which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-sixth session of the Human Rights Council in June 2014: 121.1. Consider withdrawing its reservations to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Philippines); 121.2. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (France); 121.3. Proceed with the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Portugal); 121.4. Set a date for ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Ireland); ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 121.5. Follow through with the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination against Women now that a bill is under review following recommendations made during the previous UPR session (Netherlands); 121.6. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Austria, Belgium, Madagascar, Paraguay, Slovakia), signed by Chile in 1999 (Spain); 121.7. Accelerate the legislative process for the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Uruguay); 121.8.  Ratify ILO Convention No. 189 (Paraguay);  121.9.  Consider ratifying ILO Convention No. 189 (Philippines);  121.10.  Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the  Child on a communications procedure (Madagascar); 121.11. Consider ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure (Montenegro); 121.12. Consider ratification of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Montenegro); 121.13. Accelerate the legislative process for the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Uruguay); 121.14. Ratify the Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Estonia); 121.15. Ratify the Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute, if possible with a view to contributing to the activation of the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court over the crime of aggression at the beginning of 2017 (Liechtenstein); 121.16. Accede early to the 1968 Convention on the Non-Applicability of the Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes Against Humanity, without any reservations that might defeat the purpose and object of that Convention (Ghana); 121.17. Accede to the 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness (Azerbaijan); 121.18. Continue its efforts to promote the harmonization of national legislation with international treaties (State of Palestine); 121.19. Incorporate the necessary provisions into its national legislation to allow full and prompt cooperation with the international Criminal Court (Hungary); 121.20. Complete rapidly the process of aligning its national legislation with the provisions of the Statute of Rome (Tunisia); 121.21. Enact legislation bringing into force the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance in Chilean legislation (Belgium); 121.22. Continue adapting legislation against terrorism to international standards, in particular with regard to the definition of terrorism offences and the right to a fair trial (Switzerland); 121.23. Strengthen the state of laws and good governance, including further capacity-building for law enforcement mechanisms and national institutions on human rights (Viet Nam); 121.24. Use fully the National Human Rights Institute as a fundamental piece of the comprehensive strategy for the protection of human rights (Portugal); 121.25. Ensure that the National Institute for Human Rights continues to accord with the Paris Principles and is sufficiently resourced to further advance human rights in Chile (Australia); 121.26. Accelerate steps to introduce a national preventive mechanism against torture and ensure that the definition of torture in national law aligns with the Convention against Torture (Australia); 121.27. Continue efforts in strengthening its institutional capacity to promote and protect human rights, in particular to accelerate the establishment of the office of the undersecretary for human rights, and to formulate a comprehensive national human rights plan of action (Indonesia); 121.28. Make concrete the initiatives for the establishment of the office of the undersecretary for human rights and the formulation of the national plan for human rights (Peru); 121.29. Expedite its efforts on enacting the legal aspect of the office of the undersecretary for human rights and prepare its national human rights plan as a next step (Turkey); 121.30.  Establish the institution of a children’s ombudsman (Estonia);  121.31.  Introduce a bill to establish a children’s ombudsman (Honduras);  121.32.  Establish a  fully independent  children’s ombudsman  that  could  receive complaints from all relevant stakeholders in the event of children’s rights being violated (Poland); 121.33. Continue its efforts to protect and guarantee the rights of all people, particularly those of children and women, with a view to securing for all citizens just and reasonable access to justice, education, and health care, respecting the importance and role of the family (Holy See); 121.34. Continue efforts to strengthen existing mechanisms to better protect women and children and prevent physical and sexual abuse and discrimination, including through additional training programmes to identify those most at risk of abuse (United States); 121.35. Continue taking the necessary measures to protect vulnerable groups, including women, children and any other minority, whose rights could be violated (Nicaragua); 121.36. Adopt a bill on comprehensive protection for children, in accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Brazil); 121.37. Uphold and respect the rights of the human person from the moment of conception to natural death (Holy See); 121.38. Increase support for the bill introducing financial initiatives for female candidates for political participation, enhance the consultations concerning the institutions of indigenous peoples and continue with the policy of reparation to victims of human rights violations (Iraq); 121.39. Continue current national strategies and programmes for enhancing employment opportunities, social welfare, education and the health-care system, especially for families in rural areas, migrants and indigenous and tribal people in Chile (Viet Nam); 121.40. Continue to adopt measures to combat poverty (Romania); 121.41. Complete promptly the establishment of the office of the undersecretary for human rights and the elaboration of a national plan on human rights (Honduras); 121.42. Establish a national plan on human rights (Mexico); 121.43. Ensure the broad involvement of civil society representatives in the preparatory process of the national human rights plan (Slovakia); 121.44. Facilitate early passage of related legislation and ensure prompt preparation and implementation of the national human rights action plan (Australia); 121.45. Prepare and approve the national human rights action plan and inform Member States of its future implementation (Azerbaijan); 121.46. Timely launch the formulation of the national human rights action plan (China); 121.47. Continue its efforts to implement the plan for equal opportunities 2011–2020 (Algeria); 121.48. Encourage human rights training for the security forces and law enforcement officials (Morocco); 121.49. Continue promoting education and awareness-raising programmes on human rights for officers of the judiciary (Nicaragua); 121.50. Continue its cooperation with OHCHR (Romania); 121.51. Uphold the implementation of the Anti-Discrimination Law (Czech Republic); 121.52. Take steps to fully enforce the 2012 Anti-Discrimination Act and adopt concrete measures to reduce the risk of violence against vulnerable groups (Canada); 121.53. Strengthen public education initiatives to ensure citizens are aware of rights associated with the new Anti-Discrimination Law and continue to promote equality through appropriate legislation, policy and practice (United Kingdom); 121.54. Implement the recently passed Anti-Discrimination Law and take other appropriate measures to make sure that any remaining discriminatory regulations and practices are abandoned (Germany); 121.55. Intensify its efforts to combat discrimination (Argentina); 121.56. Continue to promote legislation and actions to eliminate discrimination and strengthen the protection of the rights of vulnerable groups including women, children and indigenous peoples (China); 121.57. Continue the current efforts to strengthen measures to counter discriminatory attitudes in society, including through public education and equality initiatives and legislative measures (Egypt); 121.58. Adopt a national plan to protect human rights and take the necessary measures to ensure effective protection against discrimination in various fields, particularly employment, housing, health and education (Tunisia); 121.59. Amend the definition of discrimination contained in Law No. 20.609 to harmonize it with the recommendations of the Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Spain); 121.60. Adopt a legal definition of all forms of discrimination against women, covering direct and indirect discrimination (Bulgaria); 121.61. Adopt a legal definition of all forms of discrimination against women and take affirmative measures, allowing the elimination of direct and indirect discrimination (Paraguay); 121.62. Continue with initiatives to promote women’s rights, particularly in connection with equal pay and the disbursement of retirement pensions (France); 121.63. Continue supporting the efforts made by SERNAM in advancing women’s rights, including by providing the necessary budget allocation as well as human resources (Malaysia); 121.64. Continue the efforts to develop the National Service for Women and help it to implement the equal opportunities plan that would strengthen the role of women and their empowerment in society (United Arab Emirates); 121.65. Prevent and combat racial prejudice and take the necessary measures to ensure effective protection against discrimination, in particular in the fields of employment, housing, health and education, to ensure capacity-building and the empowerment of indigenous peoples (Congo); 121.66. Continue with the combat against all discrimination, in particular that regarding indigenous peoples through the implementation of the 2012 Anti-Discrimination Law (France); 121.67. Strengthen the relevant measures with regard to combating prejudices and negative stereotypes affecting indigenous peoples and members of minorities, and assure protection against discrimination, particularly in employment, housing, health and education (Azerbaijan); 121.68. Prevent and combat xenophobia and racial prejudice and assure protection for the indigenous population against discrimination (Bangladesh); 121.69. Speed up the legislative procedures to adopt the new legislation on de facto unions, ensuring that its provisions fully respect the principle of non.discrimination and equality between women and men (Uruguay); 121.70. Develop and carry out a plan for implementation of the Anti-Discrimination Law, including positive and preventive actions. In particular, address discrimination based on gender identity and sexual orientation (Colombia); 121.71. Review its Penal Code, namely article 373, and other laws in order to prevent discrimination against LGBTI persons (Czech Republic); 121.72. Support new laws and measures to counter discriminatory attitudes in society and to prevent discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity by providing public education and supporting equality initiatives (Netherlands); 121.73. Keep working on awareness measures, including in schools, to combat discriminatory attitudes based on sexual orientation (Spain); 121.74. Review and reform the criminal code in order to define and penalize the offence of torture (Iran (Islamic republic of)); 121.75. Incorporate the crime of torture into Chilean legislation, in conformity with the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment (Belgium); 121.76. Promote, through policies and legal norms, the accountability of the police and administrative authorities resorting to the use of force during peaceful demonstrations (Cuba); 121.77. Continue to fully investigate all alleged cases of ill-treatment by the police, including during student demonstrations (Cyprus); 121.78. Address effectively the issue of excessive use of force by the police, especially during demonstrations and protests, as well as human rights violations and ill-treatment in detention (Czech Republic); 121.79. Further strengthen accountability for human rights violations by the police and implement a national prevention mechanism against torture (Norway); 121.80. Keep under review legislation pertaining to the policing of social protests and the tactics developed in response by law enforcement agencies, and ensure that any excessive use of force is investigated and prosecuted (United Kingdom); 121.81. Conduct investigation of reports related to crimes and violence by the police and the Carabineros against communities of indigenous peoples (Uzbekistan); 121.82. Continue to address allegations of excessive use of force by the police (Canada); 121.83. Reform the penitentiary system with the aim of ensuring humane conditions for detained persons in line with international standards (Russian Federation); 121.84. Continue the improvement of the detention system (Slovenia); 121.85. Take effective measures to bring conditions of detention in line with international standards, in particular to reduce overcrowding, to improve the situation of juveniles and women in prisons and to promote non-custodial measures (Austria); 121.86. Establish an effective system to address and prevent violence against women (Iran (Islamic republic of)); 121.87. Develop a comprehensive strategy and action plan to prevent violence against women, as well as establish an effective institutional mechanism to coordinate, monitor and assess the effectiveness of the measures taken, so that all forms of violence are systematically and duly investigated and perpetrators are effectively prosecuted and punished (Poland); 121.88. Continue to improve its domestic system to protect women against violence and promote gender equality (Singapore); 121.89. Strengthen legal mechanisms to combat gender violence including the dedication of the requisite resources (Trinidad and Tobago); 121.90. Adopt effective measures to prevent discrimination and violence against women, including the adoption of a relevant strategy and a plan of action in this field (Uzbekistan); 121.91. Redouble its efforts for the protection of the rights of women, and adopt a comprehensive law on violence against women, so that all acts of domestic violence are investigated and their perpetrators are prosecuted (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 121.92. Enhance the legislation on gender and domestic violence by criminalizing sexual harassment in all its forms and by adopting a specific definition of domestic violence as a criminal offence, covering both physical and psychological violence (Italy); 121.93. Adopt legislation that criminalizes domestic violence and sanctions sexual harassment as a criminal offence, in accordance with the CEDAW provisions (Republic of Moldova); 121.94. Amend its law on domestic violence to include a specific definition on domestic violence as a criminal offence (Jordan); 121.95. Step up its efforts to combat domestic violence, including in preventive and awareness-raising measures and assistance for victims of domestic violence (Liechtenstein); 121.96. Strengthen the law on domestic violence through the development of campaigns to reduce physical, verbal and psychological aggression within the family, the establishment of mechanisms to prevent violence and protect women and children in a situation of abuse and to criminalize sexual abuse as a criminal offence (Mexico); 121.97. Eliminate the requirement of regularity to consider acts of domestic violence as a crime from the Law 20.066 on domestic violence (Spain); 121.98. Adopt a specific law to prevent and combat the sexual exploitation of children (Iran (Islamic republic of)); 121.99. Take immediate effective legal and practical measures to prevent and combat trafficking in persons, in particular women and children, and make the offenders accountable (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 121.100. Take measures to give adequate enforcement to Law No. 20.507, such as developing a standard operating procedure to identify victims of trafficking (Italy); 121.101. Adopt legislation on trafficking in persons, including for the purpose of the sale of human organs, and investigate all allegations of such crimes (Russian Federation); 121.102. Continue its efforts to take the necessary measures to combat the trafficking and smuggling of persons and to protect and assist the victims (Yemen); 121.103. Further consider the implementation of the national plan of action on trafficking in persons, which is currently being drawn up (Bhutan); 121.104. Further step up efforts to combat trafficking, including measures to protect the victims of human trafficking, as well as consider the possibility of inviting the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and children (Belarus); 121.105. Continue its efforts to fight the various forms of violence against girls, boys and adolescents and the worst forms of labour and sexual exploitation for commercial purposes, through the implementation of the second national action plan 2012–2014 (Algeria); 121.106. Explicitly prohibit the corporal punishment of children in all settings (Hungary); 121.107. Explicitly prohibit the corporal punishment of children in the home and in all alternative care settings (Liechtenstein); 121.108. Adopt legislation prohibiting the corporal punishment of children within the family (Madagascar); 121.109. Guarantee that the civil courts’ jurisdiction is applied also in cases of police persons (Carabineros) accused of violations of human rights (Czech Republic); 121.110. Reform the military justice system to exclude civilians from its jurisdiction and be used only to hear offences arising in the context of military duties (Iran (Islamic republic of)); 121.111. Bring military justice into conformity with international standards to ensure the right to a fair trial (Switzerland); 121.112. Strengthen its efforts to advance organic and procedural reform of military justice with the aim of eliminating the use of the death penalty in all hypotheses comprised in the Code of Military Justice (Uruguay); 121.113. Establish mechanisms and procedures to facilitate access to justice for persons belonging to discriminated populations who are victims of violence that ensure the investigation and punishment of such acts, the conviction of those who perpetuate them and just reparations for the victims (Colombia); 121.114. Prosecute, proportionally to the severity of the offence, serious violations of human rights perpetrated under the dictatorship, which have been identified by the mechanisms of transitional justice (France); 121.115. Put an end to impunity for those who committed severe crimes (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 121.116. Abrogate the Amnesty Decree-Law No. 2.191 (Italy); 121.117. Comply with the recommendation of the Committee against Torture to repeal the provision of Law No. 19.992 that establishes confidentiality for 50 years of information concerning the practice of torture during the dictatorship (Mexico); 121.118. Guarantee an effective and sufficient specialization of the stakeholders in the juvenile justice system (Egypt); 121.119. Take the necessary measures to establish a specialized juvenile justice system and continue efforts for reintegration of former child offenders into society, in compliance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Republic of Moldova); 121.120. Create a system of juvenile justice that includes the establishment of a children’s ombudsman (Spain); 121.121. Preserve and promote the identity of the family, recognizing its foundation in the union of man and woman based on free consent (Holy See); 121.122. Protect the right to the family, being the natural and fundamental group of society based upon the stable relationship between a woman and a man (Bangladesh); 121.123. That all the newborn children born in Chile should have the right to Chilean nationality with a legal framework for their protection (Afghanistan); 121.124. Strengthen efforts to ensure better participation of women at the political level (Greece); 121.125. Adopt legislation on quotas requiring political parties to include a minimum proportion of women among their candidates (Jordan); 121.126. Strengthen women’s participation in politics (Morocco); 121.127. Increase the participation of women in decision-making institutions (South Sudan); 121.128. Take steps to ensure that employment standards for domestic workers are fully implemented and respected (Ireland); 121.129. Take measures to bridge the wage gap between women and men (Sri Lanka); 121.130. Further strengthen measures to encourage the participation of women in the labour market and to ensure their right to equal remuneration (Thailand); 121.131. Take reform measures to ensure equality with respect to pension funds (Bangladesh); 121.132. Redouble its efforts to ensure access to health services in the country (Ethiopia); 121.133. Make sure that adequate information on family planning and the regulation of fertility is publicly available (Finland); 121.134. Make sure that sexual and reproductive rights are respected and protected (Belgium); 121.135. Initiate and promote a public debate on abortion in cases of diagnosed medical necessity and decriminalize abortion in such cases (Czech Republic); 121.136. Review and alter its current legislation that criminalizes the termination of pregnancies in all circumstances, including in cases of rape, incest and situations where the life of the mother is at risk (Finland); 121.137. Take measures to guarantee full and effective recognition of sexual and reproductive rights, in particular through the decriminalization of the voluntary interruption of pregnancy (France); 121.138. Take measures to allow legal and safe abortions in cases of rape or incest and in cases of risk to the woman’s life or health (Germany); 121.139. Take steps to strengthen and protect women’s sexual and reproductive rights in line with CEDAW recommendations, review the national legislation on abortion and enforce the national legislation with regard to access to birth control (Norway); 121.140. Review its absolute criminalization of abortion and initiate open discussions in the field of sexual and reproductive health in order to amend the respective legislation, so that abortion is no longer a criminal offence (Slovenia); 121.141. Make further efforts to ensure that the abortion laws are brought in line with Chile’s human rights obligations (Sweden); 121.142. Decriminalize abortion, at least in certain cases, such as danger to the mother’s life and health, the non-viability of the foetus or a pregnancy arising from rape (Switzerland); 121.143. Repeal all laws criminalizing women and girls for abortion and take all necessary measures to ensure safe and legal abortion in cases of rape or incest and in cases of serious danger for the health of women (Belgium); 121.144. Give priority attention to the further improvement of the quality and accessibility of medical care and education, particularly in rural areas (Belarus); 121.145. Make further efforts to provide equal access to quality education and health-care services to all, including disabled persons (Thailand); 121.146. Continue, in cooperation with UNESCO, to promote access to quality education for all (Singapore); 121.147. Continue with the efforts aimed at improving inclusion at all levels of education (Ecuador); 121.148. Address particularly the question of inequality in access to education, as a core aspect of the realization of the right to education (Portugal); 121.149. Take the necessary measures to ensure the entry into force of new education laws and ensure the expansion of intercultural programmes (State of Palestine); 121.150. Continue its efforts to ensure the enrolment of all segments of the society in education (Oman); 121.151. Further strengthen its efforts to promote the right to education, including by implementing an affordable education programme for all (Indonesia); 121.152. Continue to focus on the overall improvement in the quality of education provided, particularly in rural areas (Malaysia); 121.153. Continue to focus on the overall improvement in the quality of education, particularly in rural areas (Sri Lanka); 121.154. Take steps to eradicate female illiteracy among rural and indigenous women and implement equal education opportunities for rural and indigenous girls (Estonia); 121.155. Continue to promote the education of women in rural and indigenous communities (Djibouti); 121.156. Ensure the enrolment in the education system of children of non-regularized immigrants (Spain); 121.157. Take all the necessary measures to implement the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities at the domestic level (Ethiopia); 121.158. Enhance efforts to protect the rights of persons with disabilities, thereby continuing progress already achieved in this area (Trinidad and Tobago); 121.159. Continue with the measures aimed at improving the protection and integration of persons with disabilities (Argentina); 121.160. Continue with the actions for the promotion and protection of the rights of indigenous peoples (Ecuador); 121.161. Take further measures to ensure the promotion and protection of the rights of indigenous people (Greece); 121.162. Continue the implementation of policies addressing issues peculiar to indigenous peoples, particularly women and children (Trinidad and Tobago); 121.163. Accelerate the adoption of laws aimed at the constitutional recognition of indigenous peoples (Uzbekistan); 121.164. Take further steps to give constitutional recognition to indigenous peoples and ensure the protection of their human rights (Brazil); 121.165. Continue and intensify work to improve the situation of indigenous people with special efforts to tackle poverty among them, to improve their access to education beyond high school and to give them constitutional recognition (Slovenia); 121.166. Implement measures to support the full participation of indigenous peoples in democratic institutions and economic development (Canada); 121.167. Take action, through the appropriate procedures, to ensure that the Anti-Terrorist Law does not undermine the rights of indigenous peoples and include those rights in the legal and administrative structure of the country (Cuba); 121.168. Refrain from applying anti-terrorism legislation to Mapuche individuals in the context of intercultural conflicts, including land disputes, and increase political dialogue on indigenous issues (United States); 121.169. Ensure that all human rights of indigenous persons are promoted and respected, inter alia by ensuring the participation of concerned groups in the decision-making processes that affect their human rights and by ensuring that the application of the Counter-Terrorism Law does not undermine the human rights of indigenous as well as other persons (Germany); 121.170. Give urgent attention to the full implementation of ILO Convention 169, especially with regard to prior consultation on legislative and administrative measures that may affect indigenous communities (Norway); 121.171. Work for the effective implementation of ILO Convention 169, preventing acts of unawareness and contempt for the human rights of indigenous peoples, in particular of the Mapuche (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 121.172. Encourage the participation of indigenous peoples in decisions that affect them through the enforcement of the regulations on prior consultation adopted in November 2013 (Peru); 121.173. Continue the efforts to implement consultation mechanisms and ensure the protection of human rights of indigenous groups (Sweden); 121.174. Take concrete measures to guarantee the effective participation of indigenous peoples in decisions that affect them, in line with systematically implementing the right to consultation (Austria); 121.175. Further development of a process of effective dialogue and negotiation with indigenous groups is established to address land and natural resources issues (Australia); 121.176. Continue with its policy aimed at improving the living conditions of indigenous peoples on the labour market, with a view to their social stability (Angola); 121.177. Continue efforts aimed to minimize the environmental impact of economic activities affecting indigenous people (Belarus); 121.178. Take all measures to establish a legal framework to address the issues affecting the migrant population, minorities, refugees and indigenous people (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 121.179. Continue its efforts to adopt a law modernizing the migration regime, which incorporates a human rights approach, recognizes the rights and obligations of regular and irregular migrants and contains provisions regarding a national migration policy, the fight against trafficking in persons and the protection of refugees (Guatemala); 121.180. Establish a legal framework for the comprehensive protection of the rights of migrants, in particular the rights of migrant children or children of migrant parents (Colombia); 121.181. Continue to protect and promote the rights of migrant workers (Djibouti); 121.182. Take the necessary steps to address the social exclusion and vulnerability of migrant women (Sri Lanka); 121.183. Ensure respect for the human rights of Bolivians who go to and return from Chilean territory, especially in situations that can lead to arbitrary detention, on the understanding that every person has the right to move freely, in particular the right to leave and return to his/her country (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 121.184. Ensure justice and reparation for victims of the effects of environmental degradation and adopt an environmental standard for the pollutant emissions of foundries (Egypt). 122. The recommendation below did not enjoy the support of Chile because Chile considers it does not fall under the competence of the universal periodic review mechanism in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1. 122.1. Comply with international instruments, in order to promote the development of friendly relations between nations, guaranteeing the right of an ample right of transit in the ports of the Pacific, ensuring the universal and effective respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms within and beyond its borders (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)). 123. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex 
[English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of Chile was headed by Mr. Bruno Baranda, Minister of Social Development and composed of the following members: • Mr. Juan Ignacio Piña, Minister of Justice, Alternate Head of Delegation; • Mr. Hugo Dolmestch, Minister, Supreme Court of Justice; • Mr. Jose Luis Balmaceda, Ambassador, Permanent Representative in Geneva; • Ms. Ximena Vidal, Congresswoman, Chamber of Deputies; • Mr. Joel Rosales, Congressman, Chamber of Deputies; • Mr. Juan	 Pablo Crisostomo, Minister Counsellor, Director for Human Rights, 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs; 
• Mr. Cristian	 Streeter, Minister Counsellor, Deputy Permanent Representative in 
Geneva; 
• Mr. Jaime Moscoso, Counsellor, Permanent Mission of Chile in Geneva; • Mr. Hassan Zeran, Second Secretary, Permanent Mission of Chile in Geneva; • Mr. Jaime Godoy, head of the Universal Department, Direction for Human Rights, 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs; 
• Mr. Rene Rojas, Third Secretary, Direction for Human Rights, Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs; 
• Mr. Pablo Urquizar, Chief of Cabinet, Ministry-General Secretariat of Government; • Mr. Milenko Bertrand-Galindo, Coordinator for Human Rights, Ministry of Justice; • Ms. 	Alejandra Voigt, Coordinator of the Legal-Legislative Division, Ministry-
General Secretariat of Government; 
• Ms. Gabriela Cabellos, Chief of the Legal Division, Department of Immigration, 
Ministry of Interior; 
• Ms. Pamela Cofre, Major, Deputy Chief, Department of Human Rights, Carabineros 
(police); 
• Mr. Matias Abogabir, Chief, Coordination Unit for Indigenous Affairs, Ministry of 
Social Development; 
• Mr. Alberto Vergara, Chief of the Legal Division, Ministry of Education; • Mr. Jorge Alvarez, Chief of Studies, National Service for Minors; • Ms. Elisa Giesen, Advisor to the Minister-Secretary-General of Government; • Ms. Paula Badilla, Human Rights Advisor, Ministry of Justice; • Ms. Andrea Martinez, Legislative Advisor, Ministry of Social Development; • Ms. Paula Garcia-Huidobro, Advisor to the Minister, National Service for Women; • Mr. Pedro Cayuqueo, Indigenous Representative; • Mr. Hugo Alcaman, Indigenous Representative; • Ms. Lorena Fries, Director, National Institute for Human Rights; • Ms. Paula Salvo, Assistant to the Director; National Institute for Human Rights. 