Distr.: General 2 July 2014 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Twenty-seventh session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on  the Universal Periodic Review* Democratic People’s Republic of Korea * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.14-07222  (E) *1407222* 
Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–123 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–16 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 17–123 4 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 124–126 12 Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 28 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its nineteenth session from 28 April to 9 May 2014. The review of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was held at the 8th meeting on 1 May 2014. The delegation of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was headed by So Se Pyong, Ambassador, Permanent Representative, Geneva. At its 14th meeting, held on 6 May 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea: Côte d’Ivoire, the United Arab Emirates and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/19/PRK/1 and the annex thereto); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/19/PRK/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/19/PRK/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, the Czech Republic, Germany, Liechtenstein, Norway, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America was transmitted to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR). I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation stated that during the reporting period broad consultations had been held with a large number of institutions and organizations with a view to giving serious consideration to the recommendations received during the country’s first-cycle review; as a result, a decision was taken to accept many of those recommendations and take note of some others. Most of the accepted recommendations had been implemented or were under implementation. 6. The Government attached importance to the UPR mechanism and expected that the review would be a good occasion to provide an objective and impartial assessment of the human rights situation in the country. 7. A series of human rights-related laws, including in the areas of education, health care, the protection of the rights of the child, women and persons with disabilities, and disaster prevention were adopted or amended during the reporting period. Due regard was given to the international human rights instruments to which the country was a party. 8. Innovative measures taken for the protection and promotion of civil and political rights were described. A general pardon had been granted to convicts. Owing to the amendment of the Criminal Law in 2010, the terms of penalties had been shortened and the degree of punishment mitigated. The independence and impartiality of the judiciary was further ensured through the amending of the Criminal Procedure Law in 2011.  9. The Government made efforts to improve economic construction and people’s living and to build a socialist civilized country. In order to address food shortages the Government paid special attention to the agricultural sector, inter alia, incentivizing farmers through the introduction of new agricultural management methods and innovating agricultural science and technology. 10. Efforts were focused on laying the material and technical foundations for people to fully enjoy the benefits of a universal free medical-care system, while trying to achieve international standards in major health indicators. 11. The universal compulsory education had been transformed from an 11-year system to a 12-year system, starting from the 2014/15 school year. The quality of university education had been further enhanced through the improved educational conditions. A tele.education system had been set up, linking the local libraries and scientific and educational institutions to the central library. 12. Thousands of modern houses and welfare facilities had been built in Pyongyang and in the provinces. In 2013 alone, hundreds of places for leisure and cultural activities had been set up countrywide. 13. Progress had been made in protecting and promoting the rights of children, women, the elderly and persons with disabilities. Special attention was given to health care and education for children without parents. 14. Measures had been taken for the care of older persons with no one to depend on and a new support system had been established. The Korean Federation for the Protection of Persons with Disabilities had refined the scope of its activities, with a series of measures taken for the early detection and recovery of children with disabilities. 15. The delegation reiterated the Government’s commitment to continue efforts to ensure the enjoyment of human rights by the population despite the serious challenges faced. The persistent politically motivated pressure and military threat by outside forces remained major sources contributing to the destruction of the peaceful environment needed for economic development and improvement of people’s standard of living. Moreover, the economic sanctions threatened the people’s right to existence and the peaceful development of the country. 16. The Government would further promote cooperation and dialogue with friendly countries and open up new channels for improved relationships with others without questioning the past. The delegation assured the Human Rights Council of the Government’s commitment to fulfil its international human rights obligations. It expressed the conviction that the review would serve as an occasion to promote understanding of the real human rights situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 17. During the interactive dialogue, 85 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 18. Turkmenistan welcomed efforts to strengthen legislation, the adoption of several laws to protect women and children, and changes to the education system. 19. Uganda noted efforts to cooperate with the United Nations system, progress regarding health services and access to quality education. 20. Ukraine regretted that OHCHR technical assistance had not been accepted. It asked what measures had been taken to enable separated families to unite.  21. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland called on the country to take action on the recommendations of the commission of inquiry on human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea by closing prison camps and investigating alleged violations. 22. The United States of America was concerned at what the commission of inquiry termed systematic gross human rights violations, and urged the country to accept technical assistance from OHCHR. 23. Uruguay expressed concerns about the human rights situation and urged the country to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and follow up the recommendations of the commission of inquiry. 24. Uzbekistan welcomed progress in various areas and legislative measures to protect vulnerable groups. Further efforts were needed to improve the welfare of the population. 25. Sri Lanka noted the adoption of several laws, in particular on children’s and women’s rights, and improvements in education and health care. 26. Viet Nam noted efforts regarding socioeconomic development. It expressed concerns about the food supply and health care for vulnerable groups. 27. Zimbabwe noted various achievements and urged the country to accelerate the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) and consider accession to other international instruments. 28. Algeria encouraged the ratification of core international instruments. It expressed hope that a national human rights institution (NHRI) might be established. 29. Angola noted the signing of CRPD and efforts to improve women’s rights, but also noted that further efforts could be made. 30. Argentina was concerned about the human rights situation in the country. The situation of persons detained in prison camps required particular attention. 31. Australia was disappointed by the country’s refusal to cooperate with the commission of inquiry and supported the commission’s call for accountability for those responsible for crimes against humanity.  32. Austria expressed concern about the situation of human rights in the country, noting the report of commission of inquiry, which substantiated that violations in many instances constituted crimes against humanity, and about non-cooperation with United Nations mechanisms. 33. Bangladesh expressed admiration for the adoption of legislation on women’s rights and noted the reduction of maternal mortality and progress towards achieving Millennium Development Goal (MDG) 5. 34. Belarus welcomed the adoption of legislation regarding vulnerable groups, and achievements in education, health care and food security. 35. Belgium regretted the country’s lack of transparency, illustrated by the refusal to authorize visits from special procedures mandate holders and other organizations, such as the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).  36. The Plurinational State of Bolivia noted progress and encouraged the country to continue to strengthen human rights protection at the institutional, legal and policy levels.  37. Botswana was concerned at reports of violations, including enforced disappearance, torture and arbitrary detention. It encouraged full cooperation with United Nations mechanisms.  38. Brazil encouraged the establishment of an additional mechanism for separated families. The vulnerable situation of women and children required urgent measures. 39. Burundi commended and encouraged further strengthening of the human rights education programme. It praised measures guaranteeing gender equality in all areas. 40. Canada enquired about the decrease in the political prisoner population, the causes of death and fulfilment of basic needs in detention, and the number of collective punishment detentions and of juvenile, elderly and pregnant detainees. 41. Chad encouraged efforts to continue to improve the human rights situation. It noted that the country was party to core international instruments. 42. Chile was concerned about the lack of openness, cooperation and dialogue. It encouraged the country to respond to recommendations received and to permit visits from special procedures mandate holders.  43. China commended measures to promote and protect human rights. It called on the international community to approach the situation in a fair and objective manner and to engage in constructive dialogues and cooperation with the country.  44. Costa Rica expressed concern that the “military first” policy prevented equitable distribution of resources. It urged the country to establish an NHRI. 45. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela praised the progress made over the reporting period, including the provision of rural health services through telemedicine and the modernization of facilities.  46. The Czech Republic was concerned about the human rights situation in the country as reported by the commission of inquiry. 47. The Democratic Republic of the Congo noted the adoption of laws; the signature of CRPD; and the ratification of the International Convention on the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. 48. Denmark expressed its regret that the country had declined to cooperate with the commission of inquiry, and expressed concern about reports of systematic torture in detention, a matter raised in UPR recommendations presented in 2009 that had not been accepted by the country. 49. Ecuador noted new legislation to protect the rights of vulnerable groups, and areas requiring additional efforts, especially regarding detention centres, where conditions should be improved. 50. Egypt noted challenges to combating domestic violence and human trafficking and to protecting children’s rights. It commended the new legislation and investment in education and health. 51. Estonia expressed regret at the country’s unwillingness to cooperate with the commission of inquiry, including its prevention of access to the country and rejection of the commission’s findings. 52. Ethiopia was encouraged that the country was on track to achieve MDG 4. It called on the international community to provide sustainable humanitarian assistance funding. 53. Finland asked how the country would ensure universal access to food, particularly for marginalized groups. It encouraged the country to cooperate with human rights mechanisms to address violations. 54. France noted that the report of the commission of inquiry contained a full description of the dramatic human rights situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. 55. Germany expressed hope that the country would seriously consider the recommendations presented in the review, and remained deeply concerned about a wide range of issues. 56. Ghana commended steps towards the implementation of some recommendations accepted during the first UPR, including signature of CRPD. 57. The delegation expressed its view that the creation of the “commission of inquiry” was motivated by reasons other than human rights. The purpose of its mission was to defame the country and ultimately eliminate the ideology and social system chosen by its population. The “report” of the commission contained fabrications and constituted a manifestation of politicization, selectivity and double standards that ran counter to the principles of the Human Rights Council. Therefore, the Government had rejected the “commission”, its “report” and the consequent “resolution”. 58. With regard to Songun politics, the delegation stated that safeguarding national sovereignty provided a guarantee for the enjoyment by people of their human rights. The right to life was the foremost issue in guaranteeing human rights and of great importance to the people of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, who had been exposed, for more than half a century, to persistent military threats by hostile forces. Songun politics served to safeguard national sovereignty and had prevented the outbreak of war, making it possible to attain tangible achievements on the economic front. 59. The delegation stated that alleged discrimination based on social classification of people was unimaginable in the country, where all people were the masters of the State and society, and noted that equality was guaranteed by the Constitution and in practice. 60. It was reiterated that “political prison camps” did not exist and were a complete fabrication. Those persons sentenced to the penalty of reform through labour under the country’s Criminal Law served their terms in reform institutions. 61. The Constitution also guaranteed freedom of religion; the State respected the religious life and ceremonies of religious people and ensured the freedom to set up churches and other religious buildings. 62. Freedom to travel was fully guaranteed both by the Constitution and the law. Persons in the country could travel abroad after complying with the necessary formalities. People were free to travel anywhere within the country, with the exception of the front lines and areas with military installations, where one could travel after obtaining permission. 63. It was also reiterated that freedom of expression was a fundamental human right protected by law. The people in the country freely expressed their views through the radio, newspapers and magazines. Any violation of those rights was subject to legal punishment. 64. Greece condemned the atrocities and ongoing grave human rights violations in the country, which amounted in many instances to crimes against humanity. 65. Hungary asked about the nature of the acts for which the death penalty could be imposed and about the number of executions. It expressed concern regarding torture in prison facilities. 66. Iceland condemned in the strongest terms the unparalleled denial of human rights in the country. It urged the country to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including by allowing the Special Rapporteur access to the country. 67. India welcomed progress, including in the health sector. It expressed concern about access to food. India urged regular family reunions. A national human rights institution would improve the protection of human rights. 68. Indonesia acknowledged relevant new legislation and the institutional reorganization to ensure its implementation. It encouraged the country to engage in technical cooperation. 69. Ireland expressed concern about the unparalleled human rights situation, reports of rape and sexual abuse of women in detention, chronic food insecurity and malnutrition. 70. The Islamic Republic of Iran noted the signature of CRPD and the consideration of other human rights instruments. International mechanisms, based on mutual respect, domestic requirements and understanding, would facilitate efforts by the country to enhance an environment conducive to continued improvement of human rights. 71. Israel noted human rights violations, including starvation, suppression of freedom of movement and expression, gender-based discrimination, public executions, enforced disappearance, torture, abductions and prison camps. 72. Italy expressed concern about the death penalty, undue restrictions of freedom of movement, the criminalization of repatriated citizens and gender discrimination. It stressed the need for cooperation with international mechanisms. 73. Kazakhstan called for an abstention from politicization, for impartiality and for the country to strengthen its cooperation with United Nations mechanisms. 74. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic noted the country’s accession to international conventions and the enactment of national legislation. It welcomed the improved education, and encouraged experience-sharing and international cooperation. 75. Latvia noted reports that the country had refused to cooperate with the special procedures and urged the country to grant access to mandate holders. 76. Lithuania remained concerned about systemic and gross human rights violations. It urged the country to take steps to halt such violations. 77. Malaysia noted efforts to address gender-based violence, strengthen the economy and improve international cooperation. The development of a knowledge-based economy was encouraged. 78. Mexico expressed appreciation of the steps taken to implement CRPD, and invited the country to ratify it. It encouraged the country to consider accession to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT), the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD), the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. 79. Montenegro condemned the grave human rights violations, including restrictions on the freedom of expression and movement and the use of political prison camps. 80. Mozambique noted the country’s ratification of some international instruments, which were later incorporated into national legislation; and the increased investment in health care and drinking-water provision. 81. Myanmar welcomed the country’s active participation in the UPR, and the universal 12-year free and compulsory education system. 82. Namibia welcomed the signing of CRPD, the ratification of the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and the enactment of the acts on women’s and children’s rights. 83. The Netherlands was gravely concerned about the use of torture in the country. It commented that a life in dignity was difficult for citizens, who had to serve the State, rather than the other way around. 84. New Zealand, given the findings of the commission of inquiry, remained deeply concerned about human rights in the country, the severe lack of access to basic human needs, and political prison camps.  85. Nicaragua noted advances in economic, social and cultural rights and the adoption of legislation on preventing and mitigating natural disasters. 86. Norway requested a clear and timely response to all recommendations presented during the review, and urged the country to honour its legal obligations as a party to human rights instruments. 87. Pakistan noted the strengthening of domestic legislation, the restructuring of ministries and efforts to modernize the health-care system. It encouraged ratification of CRPD. 88. Poland stressed the obligation of the State under review to take a clear position on all UPR recommendations at the adoption by the Human Rights Council of the report of the Working Group, at the latest. 89. Portugal was deeply worried about long-standing, systematic and widespread violations of human rights, which amounted to crimes against humanity. 90. The Republic of Korea expressed its regret at the delayed response of the State under review regarding its position on the previous UPR recommendations. 91. Romania welcomed the action on CRPD. Noting the findings of the commission of inquiry, it expressed regret that the issue of international abductions remained unsettled. 92. The Russian Federation noted steps taken to improve the human rights situation in light of the recommendations of the first review, and expressed hope that those efforts would be intensified. 93. On the right to food, the delegation noted that the Government had directed primary efforts to increase food production. Details regarding action taken in that regard had been provided. The country never practiced discrimination in food distribution. 94. The delegation noted, on the issue of separated families, that although the inter-Korean relations had deteriorated in an unprecedented manner during the period under review, the Government, with a view to relieving the pain of the families and relatives separated in the north and south, had persevered in its efforts for the realization of reunions, and as a result, reunions had been resumed and held twice in February 2014.  95. The delegation also reiterated that the issue of prisoners of war had been completely settled in accordance with the Armistice Agreement and that the issue of “abduction of south Koreans” did not exist. 96. The delegation indicated that, to promote dialogue and cooperation with human rights mechanisms, replies had been sent to OHCHR clarifying the country’s positions on questions raised. At the same time, recommendations by treaty bodies had been faithfully implemented. 97. Unfortunately, the country had been singled out for naming and shaming through the coercive adoption of unjust “resolutions” in the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council each year. Such “resolutions” were full of distortions and fabrications and imposed unjust demands. 98. The country attached great importance to constructive dialogue in the field of human rights. It had acceded to international human rights instruments, such as the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, and was doing all it could to fulfil its obligations under those treaties. Consultations were under way on possible accession to additional international human rights instruments. Furthermore, the reports on the implementation of the instruments to which it was a party were under preparation. 99. With regard to the presentation of the country’s position on recommendations of the first cycle, the delegation clarified that, of the 167 recommendations received, 50 politicized ones had been rejected. Subsequently, in the plenary session in 2010 it had stated that the rest of the recommendations had been duly taken note of, as per the general practice then. Unfortunately, although it had simply followed general practice, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was unjustly singled out for accusations. That did not mean that the country was indifferent to the implementation of recommendations. On the contrary, it was truly committed to the UPR process and would provide responses to the recommendations made at the present session in due course. 100. Sierra Leone noted the enactment of legislation on higher education and the rights of children and persons with disabilities. It urged the country to submit its overdue reports to the treaty bodies. 101. Singapore noted the country’s strengthened legislative framework and that challenges remained in development and improving people’s well-being. 102. Slovakia was concerned about the death penalty, torture and ill-treatment of detainees, restrictions on freedoms and access to information, and political prisoners. 103. Slovenia was concerned about violations of economic, social and cultural rights and the findings of the commission of inquiry. 104. South Sudan commended the country’s progress in education, health care, the provision of safe drinking water and the care of orphans. It encouraged continued efforts in the area of health. 105. Spain expressed concern about the separation of powers and human rights violations against political prisoners held in large camps.  106. Cuba noted that the State under review was endeavouring to consolidate a socialist society in the face of aggressive imperialist policies directed against its country. 107. The Sudan welcomed the signing of CRPD and progress in health care and education. It encouraged continued efforts to raise awareness of human rights throughout the country. 108. Sweden was alarmed at the findings of the commission of inquiry, which had highlighted a systematic infringement of human rights, atrocities against political prisoners and evidence of crimes against humanity. 109. The Syrian Arab Republic expressed its appreciation of the country’s efforts to improve living standards despite challenges, notably economic sanctions, and its progress in education, health care and women’s and children’s rights. 110. Thailand welcomed the engagement with the UPR mechanism, but noted discrepancies in information in the reports, given the inability of the United Nations and other stakeholders to verify information provided by the Government. 111. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia expressed its dismay at extrajudicial killings and public executions, restrictions on freedom of movement and conditions of detention for political prisoners.  112. Timor-Leste commended the revision of the legislative framework and the adoption of human rights legislation, including on education and children’s and women’s rights. 113. Tunisia encouraged the completion of legislative reform and the establishment of the rule of law. It urged the country to adopt measures to guarantee citizens’ rights without discrimination. 114. Turkey, concerned by the findings of the commission of inquiry, urged the State under review to fulfil its international human rights obligations and to cooperate with the international community. 115. Switzerland deplored the lack of cooperation with human rights mechanisms, and was concerned about impunity for human rights violations and crimes against humanity, chronic malnutrition and violations of the right to food.  116. Japan was concerned about the systematic violations highlighted in the report of the commission of inquiry. It did not agree that there was no abduction issue; the reinvestigation agreed to in 2008 had not been carried out, proving that the abduction issue had not been resolved.  117. The delegation gave details on the laws and structures in place to ensure the independence of the judiciary. It reiterated that, in principle, executions were not open to the public. Public executions may occur only in exceptional cases, where the crime committed was extremely grave. Information was also provided on reforms regarding the imposition of penalties and treatment of prisoners. 118. With regard to questions on illegal border crossing, it was noted that the economic difficulties of the mid-1990s had caused some people to cross the borders illegally. However, although those people had breached the law they were never punished, as they did so for economic reasons. 119. With regard to the abduction of citizens of other countries, the delegation reiterated that no citizens of any countries other than Japan had been abducted into the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The delegation recalled that the issue had been completely resolved as a result of sincere efforts made by the country in faithful compliance with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea-Japan Pyongyang Declaration published in September 2002. 120. The delegation provided further information on the improved quality of medical services, including on the introduction of telemedicine and improvements in maternal and child health. 121. The delegation indicated that legislation, including the Criminal Law, protected women from violence. Recommendations to end violence against women were based on a lack of understanding of the situation in the country. 122. The delegation stated that allegations of “systematic, widespread and gross human rights violations” in the country were ridiculous and a complete fabrication. 123. In conclusion, the delegation stated that the session had been a good occasion for a sincere and constructive dialogue and that it would continue its efforts for genuine cooperation in the field of human rights, including in the UPR process. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations.. 124. The following recommendations will be examined by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-seventh session of the Human Rights Council in September 2014: 124.1 Further fulfil the internationally taken obligations as well as join new human rights international instruments (Kazakhstan); 124.2 Consider the ratification of international human rights instruments to which it is still not a party (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 124.3 Accede to international human rights instruments to which it is not yet a party (Chad); 124.4 Consider acceding to ICERD and the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW) (Egypt); 124.5 Consider the possibility of acceding to ICERD and CAT (Russian Federation); 124.6 Ratify international conventions, particularly ICERD, CAT, ICRMW and the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CPED), with the aim of enacting them into national law (Sierra Leone); 124.7 Ratify ICERD, CAT and its Optional Protocol, CPED, CRPD, and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC) (Tunisia); 124.8 Ratify key international human rights treaties, in particular CAT and CPED, and comply with its obligations (Brazil); 124.9 Sign and ratify CAT, as recommended previously (Turkey); 124.10 Accede to CAT and take immediate action to stop the use of torture and other ill-treatment of all detainees (Denmark); 124.11 Adopt a clear time-bound plan to become party to CAT as a key step towards demonstrating genuine commitment to protecting human rights (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 124.12 Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (ICCPR-OP 2), CAT and OP-CAT, the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and the three optional protocols to CRC (Portugal); 124.13 Ratify core international human rights conventions, in particular CAT and ICCPR-OP 2 (Latvia); 124.14 Ratify ICCPR-OP 2 (Uruguay); 124.15 Ratify CRPD, which was signed by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in July 2013 (France); 124.16 Take further steps to expedite the ratification of CRPD and its Optional Protocol (OP-CRPD) (Ghana); ** The conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 124.17 Continue the efforts to become part of all the main international human rights instruments and cooperate with the special procedures of the Human Rights Council as well as with treaty bodies (Estonia); 124.18 Continue to strengthen its domestic legal framework and implement its international human rights obligations (Singapore); 124.19 Amend the national legislation in order to make it compatible with international human rights standards, and to establish an NHRI (Poland); 124.20 Strengthen the work on aligning the national legislation and legal practice with the international obligations of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on the protection of human rights (Russian Federation); 124.21 Promulgate more laws and regulations on economic, social and cultural rights, to improve the legal framework concerning the exercise of human rights (Algeria); 124.22 Consider establishing an NHRI in compliance with the Paris Principles (Indonesia); 124.23 Establish an independent national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Ghana); 124.24 Establish a National Human Rights Institution in accordance with the Paris Principles, as recommended previously (India); 124.25 Establish a national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Tunisia); 124.26 Establish an independent NHRI and an effective complaints mechanism (Sierra Leone); 124.27 Intensify efforts to increase the level of well-being of the population and improve the national human rights protection system (Uzbekistan); 124.28 Maintain constructive and cooperative dialogue in the field of human rights (Timor-Leste); 124.29  Cooperate responsibly with the international community (Japan);  124.30  Continue taking concrete measures to further promote and protect  human  rights,  particularly  for  women  and  children  (Iran  (Islamic  Republic of)); 124.31 Continue to implement national laws in compliance with international human rights instruments in all areas, especially on the human rights of vulnerable groups, rights of the child, women’s rights, rights of persons with disabilities and elderly persons (Thailand); 124.32 Continue to fulfil its obligations under the international human rights instruments (Timor-Leste); 124.33 Fulfil its commitments under ratified fundamental human rights instruments (Poland); 124.34 Take more practical measures for the protection of children, women and other vulnerable groups and full enjoyment of their rights (Cuba);  124.35 Take the necessary measures to ensure the full implementation of laws on the promotion and protection of the rights of the child (Syrian Arab Republic) 124.36 Make further efforts to enhance awareness of rights of women and children as contained in the newly adopted laws (Timor-Leste); 124.37 Increase dialogue, consultations and cooperation with the international community, relevant United Nations bodies, United Nations human rights mechanisms and other stakeholders to enhance mutual understanding and further improve the human rights situation in the country (Thailand); 124.38 Enhanced and steadier efforts by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the other relevant stakeholders towards constructive engagement in genuine dialogue and effective cooperation in order to settle the matters of mutual concern (Viet Nam); 124.39 Encourage the participation of social organizations in the dissemination of international human rights instruments, with a view to increasing public awareness of human rights (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 124.40 Step up its efforts in human rights awareness programmes, including releasing publications related to human rights with a view to familiarising the general public with those international human rights standards and instruments to which the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a party (Malaysia); 124.41 Strengthen efforts aiming at disseminating the human rights culture through various activities throughout the country (Sudan); 124.42 Make efforts to explore options and introduce new methodologies with a view to raise awareness of human rights in the country (Ethiopia); 124.43 Promote training and human rights education for public officials (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 124.44 Provide law enforcement officials more information on international human rights instruments (Pakistan); 124.45 Take measures to ensure international humanitarian aid reaches the most vulnerable and needy (Ethiopia); 124.46 Work closely with humanitarian agencies to ensure their free and unimpeded access to all populations in need and that humanitarian aid is distributed transparently and reaches the most vulnerable citizens (New Zealand); 124.47 Secure unlimited access and entirely satisfactory monitoring conditions for humanitarian organisations (Norway); 124.48 Continue its cooperation and dialogue with the relevant international organisations with the aim to address the socio-economic needs of its people (Singapore); 124.49 Take concrete and immediate steps to improve the human rights situation in the country, inter alia, by engaging with international human rights bodies and mechanisms in a sustained way, including by granting access to the country as well as taking on board recommendations of such bodies and mechanisms for further consideration, dialogue and implementation (Denmark); 124.50 Cooperate with the United Nations and international organizations to confront challenges and obstacles in the area of human rights, and to share good practices with other countries in that regard (Algeria); 124.51 Continue developing cooperation with the human rights machinery of the United Nations (Kazakhstan); 124.52 Engage in dialogue and cooperation with United Nations human rights mechanism on the basis of mutual respect and equality (China); 124.53 Strengthen cooperation with international organizations, particularly in the areas of health, education and food (Burundi); 124.54 Consider promptly joining the International Labour Organization (Uruguay); 124.55 Continue with the cooperation programs, in line with the World Food Programme, with priority given to the most vulnerable groups, such as elderly persons, women and children, and ensure they are implemented transparently (Uruguay); 124.56 Further facilitate a conducive environment for relevant human rights-related organizations to help implement the recommendations received during the UPR process (Viet Nam); 124.57 Review seriously all the comments and recommendations made during the review and clearly indicate in due time which recommendations it accepts and how it plans to implement them (Republic of Korea); 124.58 Extend immediate and unrestricted access to United Nations special procedures and to OHCHR, in order to enable them to carry out their mandates (Turkey); 124.59 Begin fully cooperating with United Nations human rights special procedures in order to improve the situation of human rights (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia); 124.60 Consider the request of the Special Rapporteur on the right to food to visit the country (India); 124.61 Cooperate with the treaty bodies and the mechanisms of the Human Rights Council (Tunisia); 124.62 Maintain constructive cooperation with the treaty bodies of the United Nations human rights instruments to which the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a State party (Pakistan); 124.63 Act on its commitment to dialogue and cooperation by timely submitting all treaty body reports, by accepting outstanding requests by special procedures to visit the country and by engaging actively with OHCHR to ensure compatibility of national legislation with its international treaty obligations (Hungary); 124.64 Submit the reports due according to CRC (Norway); 124.65 Cooperate with all the United Nations human rights mechanisms and engage with OHCHR (Poland); 124.66 Open cooperation channels with all United Nations human rights mechanisms and OHCHR (Argentina); 124.67 Strengthen cooperation with human rights mechanisms and engage with OHCHR, and avail itself of the Office’s expertise, in order to demonstrate transparency and to adopt measures to better ensure the full enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all (Sierra Leone); 124.68 Observe the principle of non-discrimination and the international human rights agreements to which the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a party in its law and practice (Indonesia); 124.69 Take more active steps to eradicate all forms of discrimination against women (Angola); 124.70 Take immediate measures to ensure gender equality (Israel); 124.71 Continue its efforts in providing gender equal rights (Indonesia); 124.72 Consider further legislative and administrative measures to encourage the increase of women’s participation in public life (Belarus); 124.73 Strengthen efforts to ensure women’s representation in influential posts in national and regional government (Norway); 124.74 Empower women’s participation in decision-making institutions (South Sudan); 124.75 Ensure women an equal treatment with respect to men, especially with regard to the rights to food, education and work (Italy); 124.76 Further develop measures to generate better conditions for the activities of organizations on the rights of women (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 124.77 Consider putting a moratorium on capital punishment with the view to its ultimate abolishment (Namibia); 124.78 Introduce an immediate moratorium on the use of the death penalty with a view to its abolition (Slovakia); 124.79 Impose a moratorium on the death penalty as a first step to its abolition (Spain); 124.80 Impose an immediate moratorium on executions as a first step towards the abolition of the death penalty (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia); 124.81 Adopt a moratorium on executions, as a first step towards abolition of the death penalty, as previously recommended in the first cycle (Italy); 124.82 Adopt a moratorium on the death penalty and prohibit public executions, as a first step to abolition (Sierra Leone); 124.83 Adopt a moratorium on the death penalty and put an end to public executions (Turkey); 124.84 Apply a moratorium on the death penalty and make efforts to eliminate capital punishment in the judicial system (Ecuador); 124.85 Establish an official moratorium on executions (Belgium); 124.86 Establish a moratorium on the use of the death penalty with a view to its abolition, ensure judicial proceedings with all international guarantees and abolish collective punishments (Costa Rica); 124.87 Establish an immediate moratorium on the use of the death penalty with a view to abolition and in the meantime immediately end public and extrajudicial executions (Lithuania); 124.88 Establish an immediate moratorium on the death penalty as a first step towards its final abolition, withdraw the mandatory nature of the death sentence, publish detailed statistics on the death sentence and on executions (France); 124.89 Establish an immediate moratorium on the death penalty, as a first step towards its complete abolition, and publish detailed statistics on death sentences and executions (Hungary); 124.90 Establish and implement an immediate moratorium on the imposition and execution of the death penalty (Montenegro); 124.91 Disclose detailed data on the use of the death penalty and the modalities of the executions (Italy); 124.92 Stop the practice of public executions and declare and implement an immediate moratorium on the imposition and execution of the death penalty, followed by concrete steps towards the complete abolition of the death penalty (Germany); 124.93 End the practice of arbitrary, public and private executions (Chile);  124.94 As long as the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea maintains the death penalty, respect minimum standards in that regard, Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/50 and the standing provisions of ICCPR (articles 6 and 14) as well as of CRC (article 37) (Belgium); 124.95 Prohibit the use of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment as punishment for detainees (Spain); 124.96 Take measures to combat the use of torture and related acts (Botswana); 124.97 Take immediate steps to stop the use of torture and ill-treatment in all instances of deprivation of freedom (Slovakia); 124.98 Take immediate and transparent action to stop the use of torture and other ill-treatment of all detainees, including forced hard labour and denial of food quotas (Sweden); 124.99 Conduct thorough investigation of cases of the use of torture and other forms of cruel treatment, in particular cases of violence against women in the penitentiary system (Russian Federation); 124.100 Immediately establish a system to prevent sexual violence against female prisoners (Ireland); 124.101 Ensure that all prisoners are provided with the minimum standards of humane treatment, in particular that they are not subject to torture or inhumane or degrading treatment such as forced hard labour or food quotas (New Zealand); 124.102 Make a list of persons in detention, provide access to the International Red Cross to prisons and review all cases of arbitrary arrest or confessions under torture, considering reparation for victims (Mexico); 124.103 To counter allegations of torture and ill-treatment in prison facilities, allow ICRC and other international observers to have immediate, full and genuine access to all detention facilities to ensure proper treatment of prisoners (Hungary); 124.104 Invite the Special Rapporteur and/or an international humanitarian organization recognized for its independence to visit “reform institutions” and other correctional and penitentiary institutions to assess/evaluate detention conditions with a view to proposing measures to improve these conditions so that they meet international norms and standards (Belgium); 124.105 Establish measures to combat discrimination and violence against women (France); 124.106 Enact national legislation to combat violence against women, including a definition of rape that applies to domestic rape and rape in detention centres (Canada); 124.107 Punish under law violence against women, establishing adequate measures to protect victims (Chile); 124.108 Bring an end to the practice of forced abortion (Canada); 124.109 Enhance measures to address the issues of trafficking and violence against women, especially through awareness programmes and by strengthening the institutional and legal framework (Sri Lanka); 124.110 Strengthen its national efforts in the area of combating trafficking in persons, especially women and children, including through human rights education and training for law enforcement officials (Egypt); 124.111 End forced labour (Chile); 124.112 Enact and implement legislation to prohibit corporal punishment of children in all settings (Norway); 124.113 Further strengthen the independence of the judiciary (Namibia); 124.114 Enshrine fully the right to fair trial and due process guarantees (Israel); 124.115 Align its criminal justice system with its obligations under the ICCPR and other international human rights instruments (Australia); 124.116 Create a national mechanism for the review of complaints of the populations concerning human rights violations (Russian Federation); 124.117 Make efforts to achieve respect for all fundamental rights and freedoms of the entire population, especially women and children, and take all necessary measures to ensure the fight against impunity for the perpetrators of crimes, acts of violence and all human rights violations (Argentina); 124.118 Take all necessary measures to prevent or punish violations of human rights (Burundi); 124.119 Tackle impunity by investigating and timely prosecuting those responsible for acts of violence and human rights violations, in particular those committed by law enforcement and other authorities, and pay special attention to women and children to avoid that they are subjected to sexual abuse in detention (Ecuador); 124.120 Make greater efforts to foster the law-abiding culture throughout the country (Viet Nam); 124.121 Continue building the social structure of the country, focusing on the promotion and protection of the family as the vital unit of the society (Uganda); 124.122 Provide more convenient living conditions to children without parents (South Sudan); 124.123 Remove restrictions on movement in and out of the capital and derogate Article 62 of the Penal Code, which prohibits leaving the country without State authorization, thereby removing all sanctions against those who decide to leave and to return to their country (Mexico); 124.124 Ensure free movement of all citizens and refrain from punishing those who return or are involuntarily returned to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea from abroad (Czech Republic); 124.125 That steps be taken to further facilitate the easy travel of its citizens abroad (India); 124.126 Allow all religious believers to exercise their religion independently (Israel); 124.127 Reform legislation in the area of the rights of freedom of conscience and belief (Russian Federation); 124.128 Guarantee freedom of thought, conscience and religion to all individuals by ensuring the basic rights to freedom of assembly and association (Canada); 124.129 Enhance the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion, including the right to manifest such individually or in community with others in public or private, in worship, observance, practice and teaching, in line with all the provisions under article 18 of ICCPR, to which the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a State party (Namibia); 124.130 Increase measures to create conditions conducive for people to exercise freedom of expression (Indonesia); 124.131 End restrictions on the right to freedom of expression and related rights, as well as on movement (Botswana); 124.132 Allow the establishment of independent newspapers and other media; allow its citizens to access the Internet and the international media; and abolish compulsory indoctrination sessions (Australia); 124.133 Allow the establishment of independent newspapers and other social media, including free access to the internet (Israel); 124.134 Create a favourable environment for the activities of human rights defenders, journalists and other actors of civil society (Tunisia); 124.135 Open the information space in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea so that all its people have access to information of their choice and the possibility to impart it freely without fear of reprisals (Czech Republic);  124.136 Ensure free access of all its citizens to information in line with its international obligations under ICCPR (Slovakia); 124.137 Appreciating the adoption of a series of laws on information access, take practical measures to ensure citizens’ rights to free access to information (Myanmar); 124.138 Take practical measures to provide safer working conditions, suitable for its citizens (Nicaragua); 124.139 Ensure that government policy on access to food, healthcare and health services, including the Public Distribution System, is free of discrimination and political considerations (Austria); 124.140 Ensure the right to adequate food, including access to food, in a non.discriminatory manner, paying special attention to marginalized groups in its public distribution, in accordance with its international human rights obligations (Finland); 124.141 Ensure the right to food and other economic, social and cultural rights, without any kind of discrimination (Spain); 124.142 Ensure, protect and fulfil the right to an adequate standard of living, including the rights to adequate food on a non-discriminatory basis (Slovenia); 124.143 Ensure the right to food for its entire population without any restriction (Switzerland); 124.144 Allow reform of the food market in order to ensure adequate food production for its population (Greece); 124.145 Take the necessary measures in order for all the population to have access to food (Chile); 124.146 Fully prioritise fulfilling the right to food in its public spending, thus furthering recent improvements in the food situation (Norway); 124.147 Take immediate steps to allocate proper budgetary resources to ensure protection of the rights to food, health, water and sanitation (Ukraine); 124.148 Include more effective methods for the increase of food production, continue to make efforts for increased production of medical supplies and facilities (Cuba); 124.149 Increase budgetary allocation to the agricultural sector, so as to improve food security in its endeavours to further the protection and promotion of human rights of the Korean people (Mozambique); 124.150 Continue to consolidate socio-economic measures to minimize the gap between rural and urban areas (Angola); 124.151 Continue its efforts to fulfil the economic, social and cultural rights of all (Bangladesh); 124.152 Ensure equal access to social and economic rights for all citizens (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia); 124.153 Continue its fight against poverty (Bangladesh); 124.154 Intensify efforts to develop poverty alleviation programmes with specific attention to empower marginalised and vulnerable groups within the society, such as children, women and the elderly (Sri Lanka); 124.155 Undertake profound legal reforms in accordance with international law, legalize and support free market activities that provide citizens with a livelihood, and release all prisoners detained for exercising private economic activities (Germany); 124.156 Pay greater attention to the construction of sanitation facilities and housing constructions in rural areas (China); 124.157 Continue the efforts to ensure the right to adequate housing by continuing to implement plans for the construction and renovation of houses which are provided to the people free of charge (Syrian Arab Republic); 124.158 Make efforts to supply quality drinking water and provide adequate cultural facilities to the rural population (Turkmenistan); 124.159 Continue ensuring the right to safe drinking water and sanitation for all persons (Egypt); 124.160 Continue to make efforts to ensure the supply of quality drinking water to all of the population (South Sudan); 124.161 Increase access to food, healthcare, education, and adequate housing, throughout the country (Namibia); 124.162 Take further measures to improve access to basic health care, nutrition and education of children (India); 124.163 Take concrete measures to further improve hygiene and sanitation in all parts of the country (Kazakhstan); 124.164 Consider further increase in state expenditures on the health sector with a view to meeting the demand for medical supplies, including essential drugs (Belarus); 124.165 Continue to ensure effective functioning of the telemedicine system (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 124.166 Take appropriate measures to effectively implement the Strategy for Health (2011-2015) and some other programmes on health (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 124.167 Strengthen health-care services for its citizens through better training of the medical personnel, particularly in remote rural areas (Sudan); 124.168 Carry out a reproductive health strategy and other programmes for women’s health with a view to reducing the maternal mortality rate as set out in the MDG (Turkmenistan); 124.169 Take concrete measures to improve health care for women to further decrease maternal mortality (Bangladesh); 124.170 Provide the necessary resources to the health system, in order to strengthen it, and especially in order to lower child and maternal mortality rates (Uruguay); 124.171 Continue actions to ensure that children in the most disadvantaged areas enjoy the same benefits in education and health enjoyed in urban areas (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 124.172 Develop and implement more substantiated programmes and initiatives for the provision of enhanced level of the rights to education and health for all (Cuba); 124.173 Direct more attention and allocate more resources for the improvement of the quality of education (Bangladesh); 124.174 Take the necessary positive measures to modernize educational facilities with a view to successfully ensuring the enforcement of the 12-year education system (Belarus); 124.175 Improve further the general secondary education (Myanmar); 124.176 Introduce advanced teaching methods to improve quality education in the country and further promote cooperation with relevant international organizations and foreign countries in this regard (Ethiopia); 124.177 Faithfully implement the national action program for education for all by 2015 (Pakistan); 124.178 Continue to make efforts to ensure that children with disabilities and those without parents fully enjoy their right to health, education and other social and cultural rights (Sri Lanka); 124.179 Provide all means and resources to allow children with disabilities to enjoy the right to education and have access to sport activities (Egypt); 124.180 Continue to take measures for the sustainable economic, social and cultural development in the rural areas (Cuba);  124.181 Continue to promote economic, social and culture development to provide better conditions for the enjoyment of all rights by its people (China); 124.182 Intensify its efforts to promote economic development (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 124.183 Strengthen measures to reinvigorate the national economy, including allowing more people-to-people contact through engagement in economic and commercial activities, including tourism (Malaysia); 124.184 Work with the international community to consider removing the sanctions imposed on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea encouraging it to meaningfully promote and protect human rights in its country (Uganda); 124.185 Share with others the country’s experiences in disaster risk management (Nicaragua). 125. The following recommendations did not enjoy the support of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and would thus be noted: 125.1 Prioritize the need to become party to the following important human rights treaties, namely: ICERD; CAT and OP-CAT; ICRMW; and the Rome Statute, taking into account the fact that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has already acceded to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, in 1989 (Ghana); 125.2 Accede to and fully align its national legislation with the Rome Statute, including by incorporating provisions to cooperate promptly and fully with the International Criminal Court (Netherlands); 125.3 Accede to and fully align its national legislation with the Rome Statute (Montenegro); 125.4 Accede and fully align its national legislation with the Rome Statute and accede to the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the International Criminal Court (Estonia); 125.5 Accede to and fully align its national legislation with the Rome Statute, including by incorporating provisions to cooperate promptly and fully with the ICC in investigations and prosecutions and accede to the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the International Criminal Court (Sweden); 125.6 Ratify the Rome Statute and cooperate fully with the International Criminal Court in order, inter alia, to hold to account those responsible for crimes against humanity (Greece); 125.7 Ratify the Rome Statute and fully align its national legislation with all obligations under the Rome Statute (Latvia); 125.8 Adopt precise definitions of anti-State crimes, anti-Peoples crimes or crimes representing an offence against the management of the economy in the criminal code and in the criminal procedure code (Belgium); 125.9 Amend the Penal and Criminal Code to abolish generic crimes such as “activities against the State or society” (Spain); 125.10 Eliminate from the Criminal Code the crime of guilt by association (France); 125.11 Incorporate structural reforms that allow the separation of powers, establishing conditions for an independent judiciary, a multiparty political system and a National Assembly that reflects the interests of citizens at national, regional and local levels (Spain); 125.12 Consider constructively the recommendations made during this UPR and made by the commission of inquiry on human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (COI) (Italy); 125.13 Cooperate with United Nations human rights mechanisms, in particular COIs of the Human Rights Council (Costa Rica); 125.14 Acknowledge the existence of human rights violations taking place in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and act immediately on the recommendations of the COI (New Zealand); 125.15 Implement the COI’s recommendations, including those on denial of due process, reform of the prison system, abolition of the death penalty and return of abductees to their homelands (Australia); 125.16 Implement the recommendations of the COI (Latvia); 125.17 Study and start implementing the recommendations included in the report of the COI (Estonia); 125.18 Accept and faithfully implement the recommendations of the COI, especially those contained in the Human Rights Council’s resolution (Republic of Korea); 125.19 Heed the calls of the COI and Human Rights Council resolution 25/25 to end human rights violations, in particular, those that amount to crimes against humanity, and bring perpetrators to justice (Germany); 125.20 Acknowledge the human rights violations in the country and take steps to end such violations and abuses by implementing the recommendations in the COI’s final report and cooperating with the Special Rapporteur and OHCHR (United States of America); 125.21 Put an immediate end to human rights violations documented in the report of the COI, many of which constitute, in the view of the report, crimes against humanity (France); 125.22 Take measures to put an end to all human rights violations, including those associated with political prison camps and abduction, as recommended in the COI report and the Human Rights Council resolution adopted as the result of the consideration of that report (Japan); 125.23 Take immediate steps to put an end to violations of human rights, namely by implementing the recommendations of the report of the COI, established by the Human Rights Council (Portugal); 125.24 Implement the recommendations in the report of the COI (Slovenia); 125.25 Take immediate measures to end the systematic, widespread and gross human rights violations described in the report of the COI – including violations of the freedoms of thought, expression and religion; multiple forms of discrimination; violations of the freedom of movement and residence; violations of the right to food; arbitrary detention, torture and executions; and abductions and enforced disappearances from other countries (Iceland); 125.26 Allow independent human rights monitors to visit the country, cooperate with special procedures and start an open debate, both domestically and at international level, on the findings of the COI (Czech Republic); 125.27 Cooperate fully with the COI as well as with the United Nations special procedures and with the humanitarian international organizations (Portugal); 125.28 Extend an open invitation to all special procedures of the Human Rights Council, and within the framework of this cooperation, allow the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to visit the country (Uruguay); 125.29 Fully cooperate with the United Nations human rights mechanisms, including the special rapporteur on the situation of human rights in this country and the COI (Ukraine); 125.30 Cooperate fully with the United Nations, the Human Rights Council and the special rapporteur on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and allow access by the latter to the country (Greece); 125.31 Cooperate with the Special Rapporteur, in particular to allow him immediate and unrestricted access to the country, camps of ordinary prisoners and political prisoners, and implement the recommendations of the COI (Switzerland); 125.32 Cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and other United Nations human rights mechanisms and grant them unrestricted access to the country (Lithuania); 125.33 Grant access to the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and accept technical cooperation from United Nations human rights mechanisms (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 125.34 Grant access for the special rapporteur on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (Sweden); 125.35 Grant free and unfettered access to the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and to all special procedures mandate-holders (France); 125.36 Recognize the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, issue an invitation to him to visit the country, and permit him to work unhindered (Austria); 125.37 Cooperate fully with the human rights mechanisms of the United Nations and with the special procedures of the Human Rights Council, including with the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (Romania); 125.38 Fully cooperate with all the United Nations human rights mechanisms and special procedures, particularly the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and engage with OHCHR (Brazil); 125.39 Respond favourably to the request of special procedures mandate holders to enter the whole country, and fully cooperate with special procedures and other human rights mechanisms, in particular the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (Slovenia); 125.40 End State-sponsored discrimination based on the “songbun” system, as well as pervasive discrimination against women (United States of America); 125.41 Take immediate measures to end discrimination against its citizens for the alleged sins of their grandparents under the songbun system; ensure gender equality in practice; and address violence against women and girls (Australia); 125.42 Abolish all unconstitutional discriminatory practices connected with the songbun system and terminate the punishment based on collective guilt (Czech Republic); 125.43 End discrimination against citizens on the basis of the so-called “core”, “wavering” and “hostile” social classes and of political connections (Canada); 125.44 Abolish the death penalty and terminate public executions (Greece); 125.45 Cease the institutionalized policy of executions and disappearances described in the reports of the Special Rapporteur (Spain); 125.46 Provide the families of those abducted with full information on their fate and whereabouts (Greece); 125.47 Provide all families of all abducted persons with full information on their fate and whereabouts and allow the abductees and their descendants to return immediately to their countries of origin (Hungary); 125.48 Address seriously the issues of abductees, prisoners of war and separated families (Republic of Korea); 125.49 Set a specific timeframe and take concrete action to resolve the issue of abductions as soon as possible, including by repatriating the abductees (Japan); 125.50 Allow all persons of foreign origin who have been abducted, as well as their descendants, to return freely to their countries of origin (Slovakia); 125.51 Make the necessary efforts to repatriate foreigners who were forcibly held in the territory of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and provide all information to the authorities and relatives about the whereabouts of these persons (Mexico); 125.52 End the kidnapping of persons, whatever their country of origin may be (Chile); 125.53 Take immediate steps to end the use of torture and other ill-treatment of detainees in political prison camps, including forced labour and denial of food quotas (Lithuania); 125.54 Close all political prison camps immediately (Canada); 125.55 Close down the political prison camps and release all political prisoners (Greece); 125.56 Close immediately all political prison camps and unconditionally release all political prisoners detained (Lithuania); 125.57 Close down all camps where prisoners of conscience are held and release unconditionally all political prisoners (Czech Republic); 125.58 Close down immediately all political prison camps and labour camps and unconditionally release all prisoners of conscience, including relatives that have been held on the basis of “guilt by association” (Slovenia); 125.59 Close political prison camps, eliminate discrimination based on the “songbun” system and cooperate with human rights mechanisms, including the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (Republic of Korea); 125.60 Immediately close down all political prison camps, and release all prisoners of conscience, including relatives being held on the basis of guilt-by.association (Austria); 125.61 Immediately close down all political prison camps and unconditionally release all prisoners of conscience, including relatives being held on the basis of “guilt-by-association” (Sweden); 125.62 Proceed to the immediate closure of prisoner camps (Spain); 125.63 Immediately close concentration camps for political prisoners (kwan.li-so) and release all political prisoners (France); 125.64 Immediately dismantle all political prison camps, release all political prisoners, and institute protections against arbitrary detention that guarantee due process and fair trial (United States of America); 125.65 Immediately dismantle all political prison camps and abolish the practice of forced labour (Germany); 125.66 Acknowledge the existence of human rights violations, including political prison camps, dismantle them and release all prisoners (Israel); 125.67 Acknowledge the existence of political prison camps, and take immediate steps to close them (New Zealand); 125.68 Acknowledge the existence of human rights violations, including those in facilities which it describes as “reform through labour camps”, and provide international humanitarian organisations with immediate access to these facilities and their victims; dismantle all camps and release all political prisoners; and clarify with full detail the fate of any disappeared persons who cannot be readily traced (Netherlands); 125.69 Put an end to the practice of people detained in prisoner camps, closing political prisoner camps and promoting the necessary reforms in the judicial system to ensure fair trial and respect for due process guarantees (Argentina); 125.70 Abolish its political prison camps, where grave human rights violations are ongoing, and release all political prisoners (Japan); 125.71 Provide international humanitarian organisations and human rights monitors access to the camps and their surviving victims (Israel); 125.72 Provide international humanitarian organizations and human rights monitors with immediate access to the prison camps and their surviving victims (Austria); 125.73 Guarantee international humanitarian organizations and human rights monitors immediate access to political prisons and other camps, as well as to their surviving victims, in order to provide primary care (Estonia); 125.74 Provide international humanitarian organisations with immediate, free and unimpeded access to all populations in need, including those held in labour camps or political prison camps (Ireland); 125.75 Ensure access of the International Humanitarian Organization to the prison camps and to other detention centers (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia); 125.76 Provide a fair public trial to all political prisoners and prohibit and penalize torture in the detention centers (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia); 125.77 Prosecute persons responsible for serious violations of human rights and ratify the Rome Statute (Switzerland); 125.78 Hold those responsible for grave, widespread and systematic violations of human rights, including crimes against humanity, accountable for their depraved actions (Canada); 125.79 End immediately reprisals against persons on the basis of “guilt by association” and the collective punishment of families of convicted criminals (Germany); 125.80 Dismantle the “inminban” neighbourhood watches, and citizen registration and denunciation systems (Canada); 125.81 Make all the necessary political reforms in order to ensure the emergence of a government through free and fair elections (Greece); 125.82 Guarantee the right to food for its citizens on an equal basis and put an end to discriminatory food rationing as a tool to control and exert pressure on its people (Czech Republic); 125.83 Stop violating the right to food and using starvation, hunger and malnutrition as a means to ensure its control over the population (Greece). 126. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex 
[English only] Composition of the delegation The delegation of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was headed by H.E. So Se Pyong, Ambassador and Permanent Representative, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Mission in Geneva and composed of the following members: • Mr. Ri Kyung Hun, Director, Legislation Department, Supreme People’s Assembly; • Mr. Kim Myong Chol Councillor, Supreme People’s Assembly; • Mr. Pak Su Jong, Councillor, Supreme Court; • Mr. Choe Myong Nam, Deputy Director, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Ju Yong Chol, Senior Official, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Kim Sun Hwa, Desk-Officer, Supreme People’s Assembly; • Ms. Han Chae Sun, Section Chief, Ministry of Public Health;  • Mr. Kim 	Chang Min, Deputy Permanent Representative, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Mission in Geneva; • Mr. Kim Yong Ho, Counsellor, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Mission in Geneva; • Mr. Jo Chol Su, First Secretary, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Mission in Geneva; • Mr. Kim Myong Hyok, Second Secretary, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Mission in Geneva. 