  United Nations  A/HRC/28/5    General Assembly  Distr.: General 17 December 2014  Original: English  Human Rights Council Twenty-eighth session Agenda item 6 Universal periodic review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   El Salvador Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1-4 3  I Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–102 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–32 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  33-102 6  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  103-106 13  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  24   Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its twentieth session from 27 October to 7 November 2014. The review of El Salvador was held at the 2nd meeting on 27 October 2014. The delegation of El Salvador was headed by Carlos Alfredo Castaneda, Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs. At its 10th meeting, held on 31 October 2014, the Working Group adopted the report on El Salvador. 2. On 15 January 2014, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of El Salvador: China, Ethiopia and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of El Salvador: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/SLV/1);  (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/SLV/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/20/SLV/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by the Czech Republic, Germany, Liechtenstein, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to El Salvador through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review.  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation stated that the preparation of the oral presentation was the result of consultations between different government institutions, coordinated by the Ministry for Foreign Affairs. 6. The second review has allowed El Salvador to take stock of progress made in human rights since its first universal periodic review in 2010. The recommendations received and the voluntary pledges put forward on that occasion had shaped some objectives established by the Government, which had contributed to the reconstruction of democracy. 7. The progress identified had not prevented the Government from acknowledging that El Salvador was a country facing several challenges that needed to be overcome before it attained the full enjoyment of the rights of its people, in compliance with its human rights obligations. 8. The Government had a firm commitment to work for the strengthening and protection of human rights as part of State policy and as a cornerstone of its foreign policy. The new Administration was inaugurated on 1 June 2014, after the Salvadoran people expressed its will through a democratic exercise. The new Government was working on the validation of its five-year development plan, as the main guiding public policy tool. As part of the validation of the plan, the Government had launched a broad public consultation process, which included the Salvadoran community abroad. 9. The institutional focus of the Government of President Salvador Sánchez Céren was the strengthening of the structural achievements of recent years, which had improved the living conditions of sectors of society that had been excluded and impoverished for decades. 10. During its first universal periodic review, El Salvador committed to ratifying several international instruments. In that regard, the delegation noted that in 2011, El Salvador had ratified the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (OP-ICESCR) and in early 2014, it had also ratified the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (ICCPR-OP2). In addition, the Legislative Assembly was in the process of considering ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (ICPPED), the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. 11. The Executive had also engaged in inter-agency consultations regarding the possible ratification of other instruments, including the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (OP-CAT). In that context, the Government had submitted for the consideration of the Legislative Assembly a draft piece of legislation to lift the reservation of El Salvador to the Convention. In addition, the definition of torture had been amended in 2011 to make the crime imprescriptible and include all acts of torture, as defined by the Convention. 12. Internal consultations were also under way to consider the possibility of becoming a party to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure; the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Convention against Discrimination in Education; International Labour Organization (ILO) Conventions No. 169, 189, 97 and 143; the Convention on the Non-Applicability of Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes Against Humanity; the Protocol to the American Convention on Human Rights to Abolish the Death Penalty and the Inter-American Convention against All Forms of Discrimination and Intolerance. 13. At the domestic level, there had been some developments in the construction of a legal framework that would extend the recognition of the rights of particularly vulnerable sections of the population and the Government had established some institutions and mechanisms to monitor human rights. 14. For instance, in June 2014, the Legislative Assembly had ratified the amendment to article 63 of the constitution to add a clause recognizing indigenous peoples, for whom, in that framework, policies which respect and develop their identity, world view, values and spirituality will be set up. 15. Also, after extensive consultations with organizations of persons with disabilities, the National Policy on Comprehensive Care for Persons with Disabilities had been adopted in April 2014 and the Legislative Assembly was debating the possible lifting of the reservation to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Furthermore, sign language had been recognized as an official language. 16. In relation to older people, the Government had carried out a consultation process to substantially revise the Act on Older People, under a human rights approach. That reform would soon be introduced in the Legislative Assembly. The delegation added that El Salvador was a strong supporter of the negotiations for a regional and an international instrument for the protection of the rights of older people. 17. The fight against poverty and social exclusion were priorities for the Administration. Since 2009 the Government had established various programmes and measures that were part of the universal social protection system. In that regard, the Legislative Assembly had adopted, in April 2014, the Law on Social Protection and Development which established the right of the whole population to receive a minimum of social public services. 18. In 2010, El Salvador had launched a reform of the national health system, based on community family health teams, which guaranteed the right to health using a strategy of providing comprehensive primary health care and which worked directly with families and communities. The Government had also worked to raise awareness of the importance of vaccinating children and the whole family. 19. In March 2012, the Legislative Assembly passed a law on medicines, aimed at ensuring the availability, registration, quality and safety of medicines, promoting fair prices for medicines and their rational use as well. 20. The delegation also pointed out that El Salvador had already reached the Millennium Development Goal 5 target related to the reduction in maternal mortality. 21. In relation to people with HIV/AIDS, there was a proposed law for a comprehensive response to HIV/AIDS which, it is intended, will establish an approach that goes beyond the consideration of that epidemic as a health problem and contribute to the elimination of discrimination and stigmatization. 22. On the other hand, El Salvador was committed to protecting the rights of Salvadorans who had migrated. In that sense the delegation considered as a great achievement the adoption, in 2011, of the Special Law on the Protection and Development of Salvadoran Migrants and Their Families. Also, in that context, the Government had strengthened, as a priority, the consular network since 2009. The delegation informed the Working Group that, more importantly, in the 2014 elections Salvadorans abroad were able to vote for the first time. 23. The delegation pointed out that, in June 2014, the migration flow of unaccompanied children and adolescents toward the United States of America had dramatically increased, because of false expectations generated by human traffickers, the longing for family reunification and the lack of opportunities and insecurity in El Salvador. That outflow was rated internationally as a humanitarian crisis. 24. El Salvador had sought to coordinate efforts to cope with that international humanitarian crisis with the countries of the northern triangle of Central America. And in July 2014 the Government had launched an awareness campaign and information about the risks that unaccompanied children faced when undertaking such a dangerous journey, under the slogan “Do not put their lives at risk”. The campaign materials were being distributed and discussed in all schools in the country. 25. The Administration had also signed the Special Declaration on the situation of Central American unaccompanied migrant boys, girls and adolescents to the United States and, within the framework of the Organization of American States, El Salvador had sponsored, along with Guatemala and Honduras, the adoption of a declaration on  Central American unaccompanied migrant children. 26. Public security and peaceful coexistence required the joint efforts of the Government and the participation of different actors and sectors of society. For that purpose, the Administration had established, in September 2014, the National Council for Citizen Security and Coexistence, composed of local governments, the business sector, people with experience in the field, political parties, the media and the church, in order to promote dialogue and agreements that would develop into sustainable public policies on the issue. 27. The delegation mentioned that, among the measures to address the security challenges, El Salvador was a party to the Central American Security Strategy, an instrument that from a comprehensive perspective guided the coordinated actions on security adopted by the eight countries in the region. 28. El Salvador had also focused its efforts on fighting crime and corruption and promoting transparency. Hence, a number of laws had been adopted: Law on Access to Public Information, Special Law for Intervention Telecommunications, Law against Money and Asset Laundering, Special Law on the Forfeiture and Administration of Goods of Illicit Origin or Destination and Government Ethics Law.  29. In addition to that important legislation, the Administration had sponsored the development of technological tools, such as the portal on transparency and open government, and the adoption of public policies and mechanisms of social control, such as accountability of public institutions and citizens’ participation. 30. The fight against trafficking had also been a priority for El Salvador. The National Council against Trafficking was the body responsible `for the formulation of policies and the establishment of a political and strategic long-term framework for a comprehensive approach to trafficking. El Salvador announced with satisfaction that it had already adopted a Special Law against Trafficking in Persons. 31. Fighting crime was associated with another problem faced by El Salvador: prison overcrowding. On this issue, the Government had already received a number of recommendations from the Rapporteur on Persons Deprived of Liberty of the Organization of American States and the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention after their visits in 2010 and 2012 respectively. In addition, the Legislative Assembly was considering a draft law that would allow the use of alternative technologies to ensure surveillance and attendance of persons charged in a judicial process. 32. In conclusion, the delegation recalled that El Salvador had been elected to the Human Rights Council for the first time in its history, which, it added, was an acknowledgment of the progress and achievements of the country in recent years. El Salvador was committed to the strengthening of the international system of human rights and in particular, the full consolidation of the Human Rights Council. El Salvador was extremely grateful for the trust it had received during the elections to the Human Rights Council.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 33. During the interactive dialogue, 59 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 34. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela noted the significant progress made since the 1992 Peace Agreements. It commended the efforts to provide for the poorest families and for persons with a disability; to combat gender-based violence; and to educate the population and law -enforcement officers on human rights. It made recommendations. 35. Algeria noted that El Salvador had put in place a constitutional legislative framework that made human rights one of the main guiding principles of State action. It welcomed the efforts in promoting the enjoyment of human rights, especially economic, social and cultural rights, and in providing assistance to victims of the internal armed conflict. Algeria made recommendations. 36. Angola highlighted the achievements in promoting and protecting the human rights of women and children and the right to health, and the issuing of a standing invitation to special procedures mandate holders. It was concerned by the low level of school enrolment of disabled and indigenous children. Angola made a recommendation. 37. Argentina welcomed the ratification of OP-ICESCR and noted that ICPPED was under review with a view to ratification. It noted the enactment of domestic legislation on eliminating discrimination and preventing violence against women. Argentina made recommendations. 38. Australia congratulated El Salvador on its recent presidential elections and the introduction of voting for Salvadoran citizens abroad. It also welcomed the moves to address violence against women. Australia expressed concern at the punitive anti-abortion laws and at the fact that the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) rated El Salvador as having among the highest incidences of homicide of children. Australia made recommendations. 39. Bangladesh noted the adoption of the 2011 Act on Equality, Fairness and the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, and the reform of the Political Parties Act. It encouraged the measures relating to the family. It emphasized that the treaty bodies had raised concerns about discrimination against women and socioeconomic disparities, particularly for migrants. Bangladesh made recommendations. 40. The Plurinational State of Bolivia commended the constitutional changes to recognize indigenous peoples and the policies to develop their cultural identity. It encouraged further strengthening of human rights institutions, standards and public policies. It made recommendations. 41. Brazil noted the ratification of international human rights instruments and the adoption of a national child protection policy. Noting ongoing challenges, it commended the progress made in protecting women’s rights, including providing assistance to victims of violence, and providing reproductive and sexual advice. Further measures should be taken to protect lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) persons. Brazil made recommendations. 42. Canada welcomed the steps taken by El Salvador to address violence against women. It also welcomed efforts to improve the implementation of national programmes aimed at fostering children’s rights. However, it stressed the importance of taking measures to improve the protection of children against violence. Canada made recommendations. 43. Chile recognized efforts to strengthen human rights within a complex context. It noted the child protection law and the Political Parties Act, which would promote the political participation of women. Cultural models discriminating against women should be eliminated, promoting access to judicial protection and combating impunity. Chile made recommendations. 44. Colombia noted efforts to implement recommendations of the first universal periodic review. It noted the transparency of the country in collaborating with human rights mechanisms. Colombia made recommendations. 45. Costa Rica commended human rights improvements, particularly in women’s rights and the health sector. It expressed concern regarding violence, particularly against women and children, as a cause of migration and the collapse of the prison system. Efforts to improve children’s living conditions should be strengthened. It made recommendations. 46. Côte d’Ivoire noted the efforts carried out by El Salvador in implementing the recommendations of the first cycle of the universal periodic review. It was especially pleased with the measures taken to combat discrimination against vulnerable persons and to ensure equality in different areas. Côte d’Ivoire made recommendations. 47. Cuba noted progress in promoting and protecting human rights. It commended the steps taken to combat discrimination and improve judicial administration and public security, thereby combating crime and corruption. It noted progress in the area of health. Cuba made recommendations. 48. The Czech Republic expressed its appreciation for the details on human rights in El Salvador. It also welcomed steps towards eventual ratification of OP-CAT. It made recommendations. 49. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea noted achievements in the protection and promotion of human rights and encouraged further progress in that regard. It took note of the election of El Salvador to the Human Rights Council. It made recommendations. 50. Ecuador recognized the ratification of OP-ICESCR and the government programme 2014–2019, which would ensure that human rights were used to guide the Government. It acknowledged public policies on equality, food and nutritional security, health, environment and education. Ecuador made recommendations. 51. Egypt commended the positive promotion of human rights and the accession of El Salvador to international conventions, and the consultations with national agencies and civil society on the possible ratification of other instruments. It requested additional information on the experience of integrating street children into Salvadoran society. Egypt made recommendations. 52. Estonia commended the ratification of ICCPR-OP2 and the standing invitation to special procedures, and encouraged compliance with the requests of the treaty bodies. Recognizing commitments to free speech, Estonia encouraged further protection for media workers. It invited steps to prevent violence against women and LGBTI persons and made a call for the abortion legislation to be amended. Estonia made recommendations. 53. The United States of America noted that insecurity, lack of economic opportunity and weak governance caused significant population displacement. It recognized the progress in combating impunity, but noted low conviction rates and corruption. A lack of respect for the separation of powers and prison conditions were causes for concern. It made recommendations. 54. Germany welcomed the progress on child labour and encouraged the adoption of a national plan on that regard. Although the national reconciliation process had advanced, the human rights situation remained a concern, as reflected in the high rate of child homicide and the inhumane prison conditions. Germany made recommendations. 55. Ghana applauded the bill to tackle discrimination against persons living with HIV and to recognize that the issue was linked to the country’s development. It reiterated concerns raised by the Committee on the Rights of the Child regarding violence against children, child labour and the possible recruitment of children into gangs. Ghana made recommendations. 56. Greece recognized the investment in policies and social programmes. It emphasized that challenges prevailed, especially regarding education. Greece expressed concern regarding the not yet achieved demilitarization of public security institutions, especially the police force. It requested information on the ratification of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. Greece made recommendations. 57. Guatemala welcomed the election of El Salvador to the Human Rights Council; the ratification of OP-ICESCR; and the constitutional reform to recognize indigenous peoples. It valued the adoption of legislation on migrants’ rights, gender equality and voting rights for Salvadorans abroad. It noted the lack of a specific definition of discrimination. 58. The Holy See commended efforts to promote and protect human rights and noted the determination to protect migrants’ rights and aid their integration, which was particularly important for women and unaccompanied minors. The initiative to secure proper birth registration was a positive defence of human life. It made recommendations. 59. Iceland expressed concern at the prohibition and criminalization of abortion, even in life-threatening cases or cases of rape. The prevalence of gender-based violence was also a cause for concern and El Salvador was encouraged to ensure the effective implementation of legislation to protect women. Iceland made recommendations. 60. Indonesia welcomed the measures taken to promote human rights, including the adoption of legislation aimed at protecting women from violence and discrimination, and the adoption of the Special Law on the Protection and Development of Salvadoran Migrants and Their Families. Indonesia made recommendations. 61. Ireland commended legislation to combat gender-based violence, but noted a lack of resources for its implementation. It noted high levels of gender-based violence, including on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity. Impunity for human rights violations remained a concern. Ireland made recommendations. 62. Italy congratulated El Salvador on the achievement of the Millennium Development Goal on maternal mortality ahead of schedule. It appreciated the measures taken by the authorities to improve the enjoyment of the rights of the child, in particular the setting of the minimum age for marriage at 18. Italy made recommendations. 63. Kuwait welcomed achievements in the fields of employment, social security and living standards. It commended the steps taken to assist new ventures by coordinating activities between the Ministry of Economy and the National Commission on Microenterprises and Small Businesses. Kuwait made recommendations. 64. Lebanon welcomed measures to promote and protect political, social and economic rights, notably amendments to article 63 of the constitution, which recognized indigenous peoples, and the establishment of the National Council on Trafficking in Persons. The efforts taken with regard to OP-CAT were welcomed. Lebanon made a recommendation. 65. Luxembourg noted its partnership with El Salvador. It welcomed the ratification of ICCPR-OP2 and encouraging results in combating maternal mortality. Gender-based violence remained a cause for concern, since the measures introduced had scarcely reduced it. The criminalization of abortion remained another area of concern. Luxembourg made recommendations. 66. Malaysia welcomed legislative measures on gender-based violence, child protection and social development, and the achievements in health care, public safety and the rights of children with disabilities. Legal instruments to combat crime and corruption and the development of the universal social protection system were also noted. Malaysia made recommendations. 67. Paraguay welcomed ratification of international instruments, including ICCPR-OP2, and commended the definition of femicide, measures to protect victims of violence, promote gender equality and eradicate discrimination against women. It applauded the constitutional reform for the recognition of indigenous peoples. It encouraged El Salvador to continue developing its intercultural health policy. Paraguay made recommendations. 68. Montenegro recognized the improved human rights framework, the standing invitation to special procedures and ratification of OP-ICESCR. The reservation to ICCPR-OP2 permitting capital punishment under military law was a concern. It asked what measures had been developed to prevent the torture and ill-treatment of children and protect them from violence. Montenegro made recommendations. 69. Morocco welcomed the ratification of OP-ICESCR and ICCPR-OP2, the recognition of indigenous peoples, national efforts on trafficking in persons, the protection of the rights of members of civil society organizations, the National Commission on the search for children who disappeared during the internal armed conflict and the strengthened institutional framework, particularly regarding women’s rights. 70. The Netherlands welcomed the standing invitation to special procedures and the act to promote women’s rights. While expressing hope that the project of the Central American Integration System on gender-based violence would make improvements, it noted continuing discrimination against women and expressed concern regarding the situation of human rights defenders. The Netherlands made recommendations. 71. Nicaragua noted government initiatives to meet social needs, including health, education and judicial administration, and to combat gender-based violence and human trafficking. While challenges remained, it hoped that membership of the Human Rights Council would provide an opportunity for El Salvador to share best practices and meet its obligations. Nicaragua made recommendations. 72. Norway congratulated El Salvador on its accession to ICCPR-OP2 and welcomed its apology and reparatory measures for the events at the massacre of El Mozote. It expressed concern regarding impunity for violence against women and children and the total ban on abortion. Norway made recommendations. 73. Spain noted ratification of ICCPR-OP2. It expressed concern regarding gender inequality and discrimination against women and children. It welcomed the adoption of the law against gender-based violence, which defined femicide, and the child protection law. It commended the initiatives to improve the situation of LGBTI persons. Spain made recommendations. 74. Peru commended the establishment of the National Council on Trafficking in Persons and the related national policy and political and strategic framework; adoption of the Act on Social Development and Protection; and the implementation of the vote for Salvadorans living abroad. Peru made recommendations. 75. The Philippines welcomed the alignment of domestic legislation with international human rights laws, noting the value of international cooperation for human rights education in improving human rights mechanisms. It commended the efforts to improve socioeconomic rights and the anti-trafficking measures, and requested details on their effectiveness, particularly concerning trafficking in children. It made recommendations. 76. Poland welcomed the introduction of the legislation referring to the protection of children and adolescents, while raising concerns about the proper implementation of the current legislation, namely the Child and Adolescent Protection Act of 2009. It noted that, despite efforts made in combating child labour, progress was still needed. Poland made recommendations. 77. Portugal welcomed the standing invitation to special procedures, the ratification of ICCPR-OP2 and OP-ICESCR and the A status of the national human rights institution. It expressed concern about the gender imbalance in education and requested information on measures taken. It welcomed steps to ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. Portugal made recommendations. 78. The Republic of Korea acknowledged the progress made by El Salvador, in particular regarding the standing invitation to special procedures, its National Commission on the search for children who disappeared during the internal armed conflict and the successful implementation of the Women’s City Programme. It made recommendations. 79. The Russian Federation noted the progress in human rights protection, the improvement in legislation, and extended social guarantees. It welcomed efforts to combat gender-based and domestic violence, legislation to provide public access to the databases of the executive branch and efforts to protect the rights of Salvadoran migrants, particularly unaccompanied minors in the United States. It made recommendations. 80. Singapore welcomed the amendments to the Criminal Code to enhance protection of women and children from domestic violence. It noted positively the creation of the Special Technical Commission to oversee the implementation of the relevant laws and policies. Singapore praised the 2011 ministerial decision that listed the hazardous activities not to be carried out by children and adolescents. It made recommendations. 81. Slovenia inquired about the concrete results from the implementation of the comprehensive policy to combat violence against women. It requested information on the adoption of measures to eliminate discrimination against disabled persons, particularly with regard to medical procedures, where the informed consent of persons with disabilities is needed. Slovenia made recommendations. 82. Mexico welcomed efforts to sign and ratify international instruments, particularly consideration of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, and the steps taken to withdraw the reservation to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT), allowing adherence to OP-CAT. It welcomed the standing invitation to special procedures and the progress made in indigenous peoples’ rights. Mexico made recommendations. 83. Sri Lanka noted initiatives to combat social exclusion and recognize health rights. It commended the promotion of children’s rights and strategies to prevent violence against young people. It recognized the efforts regarding women’s rights and noted measures to prevent gender-based violence in schools. Sri Lanka made recommendations. 84. The State of Palestine welcomed the establishment of a national legal framework to promote gender equality, eliminate gender-based discrimination and combat violence against women but expressed concern regarding the continuing discriminatory stereotypes of women’s roles. It commended measures to protect children’s rights. It made recommendations. 85. Sweden noted the view of the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences, that the ban on abortion posed risks to women and girls. It observed that the constitutional chamber of the Supreme Court had failed to rule on the constitutionality of the national reconciliation law. Sweden made recommendations. 86. Thailand commended efforts to ratify international human rights instruments and commitments to women’s and children’s rights, noting that those groups continued to be targets of violence. It noted the positive role of education in preventing young people from joining criminal groups and offered assistance with health coverage matters. Thailand made recommendations. 87. Trinidad and Tobago recognized the challenges facing El Salvador in implementing its human rights programmes and meeting its obligations. It commended the constitutional reform measures regarding the rights of indigenous persons and the legislation to combat violence and discrimination against women and children. It made recommendations. 88. Turkey welcomed the act to protect women’s rights, introduction of a centralized birth registration system and the national health system reform. It expressed concerns regarding violence against women and the alleged torture and murder of children. It encouraged efforts to combat poverty, including through its universal social protection system. Turkey made recommendations. 89. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland applauded ratification of ICCPR-OP2 and requested that the reservation thereto be withdrawn. It welcomed progress on health and children’s and women’s rights, and encouraged consistent implementation of national and international legislation. It suggested improving the treatment of women who had had abortions or miscarriages and ensuring the protection of records of human rights abuses. It made recommendations. 90. France congratulated El Salvador on its election to the Human Rights Council. It asked what new measures would be taken to combat violence against women, which remained a serious problem, and asked whether El Salvador would consider reviewing the criminalization of abortion, which it encouraged. France made recommendations. 91. Uruguay welcomed the ratification of ICCPR-OP2 and the legislative progress made on human rights, including against discrimination based on gender or sexuality, and poverty reduction. Efforts to combat children’s rights should be strengthened. It commended the steps taken to eradicate gender-based violence and protect victims, including by defining femicide. Uruguay made recommendations. 92. Sierra Leone commended the ratification in 2014 of ICCPR-OP2. Noting the efforts undertaken to promote the rights of the child, Sierra Leone encouraged further measures and programmes to limit the worst forms of child labour and reduce the incidence of children joining street gangs. It made recommendations. 93. The delegation of El Salvador stated that in 2009, the Legislative Assembly had adopted the Law on the Comprehensive Protection of Children and Adolescents. It had also created a new system to protect children and adolescents, led by the National Council for Childhood and Adolescence, which also included a specialized justice chamber to protect children. There were however remaining challenges to protecting children better, to the extent that such a specialized system would be progressively implemented and the population made use of it. 94. While it was important to continue making improvements, progress had been achieved in the education sector. Early childhood was a government priority. As school attendance was linked to food and children social conditions, programmes ensuring food, clothing and school supplies had been implemented. 95. Protection boards ensured access to justice for children and adolescents as they could bring complaints on violations of their human rights directly to them.  96. Corporal punishment was expressly prohibited in the above-mentioned law (arts. 38 and 89). 97. There were ongoing policies and strategies on sexual and reproductive health in coordination with the Ministries of Education and Health. 98. Children and adolescents had actively participated in the development of policies affecting them and they were currently involved in developing a five-year plan. 99. El Salvador was committed to the rights of LGBTI people. Executive Decree 56 prohibited discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity. Several measures had been implemented to ensure access to work without discrimination, education on non-discrimination, and the safety of LGBTI people. 100. Executive Decree 204 established the National Council of reparation for victims of human rights violations within the armed conflict context. Progress was being made on reparations in the fields of health, education and historical memory. 101. The strategy entitled Ciudad Mujer ensured the full access of women to knowledge and the exercise of their rights, especially those related to a life free from violence and non-discrimination. 102. In concluding, the delegation acknowledged the second cycle of the universal periodic review as an opportunity to share achievements on human rights. The recommendations received would contribute to the protection and promotion of human rights in the country and would be considered at the moment of defining its priorities.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**  ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 103. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue/listed below have been examined by El Salvador and enjoy the support of El Salvador: 103.1 Continue the process of ratification of international instruments, especially in the area of human rights (Côte d’Ivoire); 103.2 Facilitate the completion of existing initiatives to ratify the international instruments listed in paragraph 7 of its national report (Peru); 103.3 Step up efforts leading to the ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance; the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court; the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture; and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Ghana);  103.4 Ensure the protection of the Office of Human Rights Advocate from any interference or external pressure (Portugal);  103.5 Submit its report that has been overdue since 2013 to the Committee against Torture (Ghana); 103.6 Take additional steps to combat crime, especially that committed by young people and carry out strategies to protect them (Russian Federation); 103.7 Reduce citizen insecurity in a sustainable, long-term perspective, addressing the root causes of violence and combating impunity while respecting human rights (Sweden); 103.8 Take measures to further improve enforcement of existing laws criminalizing rape and domestic violence, including by thoroughly investigating and prosecuting all acts of violence against women, and providing targeted training and capacity-building to law enforcement officials (Canada); 103.9 Adopt measures guaranteeing the protection of women, who are victims of discrimination and violence on the grounds of their sexual orientation or gender condition (Argentina);  103.10 Ensure that all cases of gender-based violence are properly investigated, the perpetrators are brought to justice and that its victims have better access to justice, health and social services and State support (Czech Republic);  103.11 Continue and promote the policy of women protection and empowerment through, inter alia, applying harsher punishments to perpetrators of the crime of femicide (Egypt); 103.12 End the prevailing climate of impunity regarding violence against women, by ensuring that such cases are investigated thoroughly, that those responsible are brought to justice and that survivors have access to justice, effective remedies and appropriate support services (Spain); 103.13 Adopt a national action plan on the Security Council resolution on women, peace and security (Portugal);  103.14 Adopt a national plan to protect women against violence (Russian Federation); 103.15 Continue its efforts to take more concrete measures to ensure the protection of women against all forms of discrimination and violence (State of Palestine); 103.16 Put in place more concrete measures to combat violence against women and children (Thailand); 103.17 Continue efforts to improve the situation of women and combat violence against women (France); 103.18 Improve the detention conditions of minor offenders, including better protection against institutional violence, and promote access to education and rehabilitation programmes to ensure future reintegration in society and full respect of their rights (Canada); 103.19 Continue its efforts to prevent children from being subjected to torture and ill-treatment in all circumstances (State of Palestine); 103.20 Genuinely articulate the Child and Adolescent Protection Act (2009), providing it with the necessary human and financial resources for its effective implementation at all levels of government (Spain); 103.21 Establish effective measures to implement the Law on the Comprehensive Protection of Children and Adolescents so as to eradicate the violence suffered by children, girls and adolescents (Costa Rica); 103.22 Establish indicators to assess and follow up the effective implementation of the national policy on the protection of children and adolescents (2013–2023), adopt education policies to prevent dropouts at all levels and reintegrate deported children (Mexico); 103.23 Put further effort and attention into the prevention of violence against children, expressly prohibit corporal punishment by law in all settings, eliminate the worst forms of child labour and prevent children from living in the street (Estonia); 103.24 Develop a comprehensive policy to prevent violence against children, including all necessary measures to prevent children from being subject to torture and ill-treatment, to living and working in the streets and being subjects to threats and forced recruitment by gangs. (Germany); 103.25 Intensify efforts to eliminate, to a large extent, all possible forms of violence against children and institute comprehensive policies that guarantee the rights of children, including children with disabilities, irrespective of gender (Ghana); 103.26 Further develop and implement comprehensive policies to prevent violence against children (Turkey); 103.27 Promote measures aimed at preventing child labour and violence against children, in compliance with the ILO conventions and the other relevant international instruments (Italy); 103.28 Further strengthen the efforts to eliminate the worst forms of child labour, especially in the rural areas (Poland); 103.29 Continue its efforts to eradicate child labour in cooperation with UNICEF and relevant international organizations (Singapore); 103.30 Strengthen its policies relating to children labour and the elimination of the economic exploitation of children (Trinidad and Tobago); 103.31 Prepare and adopt a comprehensive policy to assist and prevent children from living in the street (Slovenia); 103.32 Secure the cooperation and full involvement of local government units and civil society partners in the implementation of anti-trafficking laws and programmes (Philippines); 103.33 Take further steps to address victims’ rights, including taking forward reparations for victims of internal armed conflict, and to explore possible cooperation with United Nations special procedures in that regard (Germany); 103.34 Properly investigate all attacks against human rights defenders and prosecute their perpetrators (Netherlands); 103.35 Promote equality between men and women in the labour market, including, inter alia, equal pay for equal work and the support of domestic care and tasks (Chile); 103.36 Continue its efforts to improve the standard of living of the population (Cuba); 103.37 Further progress to overcome the causes of extreme poverty, a major factor in the cases of juvenile delinquency and human trafficking, especially of the young by a firm implementation of the 2013 national policy on trafficking in persons. (Holy See);  103.38 Continue its national housing policy to address the housing shortage (Kuwait); 103.39 Continue actions to improve the realization of the human right to water, under the framework of General Assembly resolution 64/292 (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 103.40 Make continued efforts for the sustainable development of the health sector so as to ensure provision of high-quality medical services to all citizens (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 103.41 Ensure that all women and girls have access to sexual and reproductive health services (Spain); 103.42 Assure women of their rights to safe medical and reproductive health care (Sweden); 103.43 Intensify efforts to better organize existing infrastructure and facilities relating to education so as to ensure that all children have equal access to education in both urban and rural areas (Greece); 103.44 Allocate greater budget to improving educational facilities, especially in the rural areas, and promote school enrolment at all levels (Thailand); 103.45 Step up its measures in promoting and protecting the rights of children living in rural areas including through ensuring equal access to education between children living in urban and rural areas (Malaysia); 103.46 Promote literacy, especially in rural areas, and focus these efforts on women and girls (Estonia); 103.47 Work on increasing the attendance rate of children at all levels of education, also with the aim of hampering and weakening the capability of criminal organizations to attract youngsters in the vicious circle of illegal activities and violence (Italy); 103.48 Strengthen its efforts to address the discrepancies in access to education between girls and boys, as well as the high drop-out rates from schools (Portugal);  103.49 Further develop more inclusive school programmes to ensure better integration of children with disabilities and indigenous children (Angola); 103.50 Further promote education for children, especially in the rural areas and at secondary level (Sierra Leone); 103.51 Establish an effective policy to guarantee the implementation of non-discriminatory sex education throughout the education system and at all levels, in line with current up-to-date scientific information and from a human rights approach (Colombia); 103.52 Continue strengthening its institutional framework in conformity with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 103.53 Continue its efforts in providing the necessary care for persons with disabilities, including children with disabilities (Malaysia); 103.54 Adopt measures to further the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights by indigenous peoples (Italy);  103.55 Make progress with the qualitative census of indigenous peoples from El Salvador (Colombia); 103.56 Promote the adoption of a new national migration legislation (Sierra Leone); 103.57 Enhance efforts to ensure the safety and rights of migrants (Bangladesh); 103.58 Adopt official procedures to establish the best interests of the child in all processes, in particular in those referring to immigration and refugees, using as a guideline, inter alia, general comment No. 14 of the Committee on the Rights of the Child (Chile); 103.59 Support the ongoing process of protection of children and adolescents by raising awareness of the ramifications of illegal migration, and provide for the adequate care and facilities necessary for their repatriation and reintegration into society (Egypt); 103.60 Implement a national programme to support minors, to reduce the flows of migration (Russian Federation); 103.61 Cooperate at the regional level to find a solution to the very serious problem of the growing number of unaccompanied minors from El Salvador that immigrate to other countries of the region (France). 104. The following enjoy the support of El Salvador, which considers that they are already implemented or in the process of implementation: 104.1 Continue and improve the efforts to implement the Convention against Torture (Indonesia); 104.2 Continue the introduction of advanced programmes for ensuring fundamental rights, especially for vulnerable groups (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 104.3 Continue its efforts to involve relevant stakeholders, including civil society, as a partner of the Government in promoting and protecting human rights (Indonesia); 104.4 Develop a comprehensive policy in order to remove obstacles to the effective implementation of existing laws protecting women and children (Norway); 104.5 Enforce existing legislation on women’s, children’s and adolescents’ rights (Sierra Leone); 104.6 Continue and strengthen actions put in place to improve the rights of children and women, and the right to health for all its population (Cuba); 104.7 Continue implementation of the national policy for a comprehensive protection of children and adolescents for the period 2013–2023 (Algeria); 104.8 Allocate adequate resources for programmes ensuring the full enjoyment of the rights of children and adolescents (Australia); 104.9 Take all necessary steps towards the full implementation of the national system of integral protection of children and adolescents, including through appropriate funding, as provided for in the national policy for the promotion of the integral protection of children and adolescents (Brazil); 104.10 Promote greater participation and empowerment of young people in decision-making processes that contribute to the development of the country (Nicaragua); 104.11 Continue its efforts to eliminate discrimination against women (Bangladesh); 104.12 Take measures to ensure equal treatment of women in social and professional areas (Netherlands); 104.13 Intensify its ongoing actions to eliminate discrimination against women at all levels in the society (Sri Lanka); 104.14 Take specific measures to protect women from being victims of discrimination and violence, including the promotion of women’s rights through education and the media, further training of public officials, reduction in gender inequalities and empowerment of women (Turkey); 104.15 Continue its efforts to eradicate acts of racism and other forms of discrimination (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 104.16 Take measures to prevent and punish torture in accordance with the recommendations of the Committee against Torture (Mexico); 104.17 Join efforts for the appropriate development of the comprehensive police education system, approved in May 2013, aimed at the effective promotion and protection of human rights as a mainstream subject (Ecuador); 104.18 Accord a high priority to the implementation of legislation addressing violence against women (Australia); 104.19. Take all necessary steps to ensure the effective implementation of legislation seeking to combat violence against women and girls, and take specific measures to protect those who are victims of violence based on their sexual orientation and gender identity (Ireland); 104.20 Take all necessary measures to guarantee the full and effective implementation of laws on the protection of women and girls so as to strengthen the rights of victims, but also to fight against the impunity of perpetrators of violence against them (Luxembourg); 104.21 Deploy all necessary efforts to ensure the full implementation of the Comprehensive Special Law for a Life Free of Violence for Women, adopted in November 2010 (Uruguay); 104.22 Continue working against violence against women in line with its national legal framework for equality (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 104.23 Continue actions to safeguard the physical and mental integrity of women, in accordance with the continuing awareness-raising campaign on the legal framework for substantial equality initiated in 2012 (Ecuador); 104.24 Continue to implement legal and administrative measures to protect women and girls from domestic and sexual violence (Singapore); 104.25 Strengthen the implementation of the Law for Integral Protection of Children and Adolescents (Germany);  104.26 Consider conducting a campaign to promote awareness of the Child and Adolescent Protection Act of 2009 and of the mechanisms for access to justice for children and adolescents (Poland); 104.27 Speed up the process of establishing a special law on trafficking in persons (Philippines); 104.28 Take the necessary steps to ensure the adoption of new legislation to counteract human trafficking (Trinidad and Tobago); 104.29 Continue making efforts to prevent and sanction trafficking in persons (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 104.30 Fully implement the recommendations on human rights defenders it accepted during the previous UPR, including investigating fully and effectively violations committed against human rights defenders and journalists and bringing to justice those responsible (Norway); 104.31 Continue promoting measures against extreme poverty and in favour of social inclusion (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 104.32 Continue its efforts to fight poverty and social exclusion (Algeria); 104.33 Continue its poverty reduction measures through the universal social protection system (Kuwait); 104.34 Sustain and promote the Government’s socioeconomic developmental policies by means of, inter alia, devoting more attention to any possible discrepancy between urban and rural areas in this regard (Egypt); 104.35 Continue strengthening its education programmes and continue promoting the sound social policies that ensure the provision of health, food and social protection goods and services for the benefit of its people (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 104.36 Establish mechanisms for consultation with indigenous peoples to adopt policies and legislation that promote their rights (Mexico). 105. The following recommendations will be examined by El Salvador which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-eighth session of the Human Rights Council in March 2015: 105.1 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance; the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture; the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women; and the UNESCO Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination in Education (Portugal);  105.2 Continue to consider signing and ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture; acceding to the Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance; and signing the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and to implement it by national law (Uruguay); 105.3 Ratify other important human rights instruments such as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) and CAT facultative protocols (Greece); 105.4 Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court as well as the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Poland); 105.5 Continue its efforts aimed at ratifying the Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Argentina); 105.6 Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Italy); 105.7 Positively consider ratifying the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Trinidad and Tobago); 105.8 Continue its efforts to accede to the Rome Statute establishing the International Criminal Court (Costa Rica); 105.9 Continue its process of accession to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and take all necessary measures to incorporate it into its national legislation (Luxembourg); 105.10 Complete internal legal procedures in order to ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Montenegro); 105.11 Finalize the process of ratification of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Portugal); 105.12 Accede to and fully align its national legislation with the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and accede to the Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of the Court (Estonia); 105.13 Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Paraguay); 105.14 Ratify the Optional Protocol to CEDAW (Sweden); 105.15 Ratify the Optional Protocol to CEDAW, which was signed in 2001 (Sierra Leone); 105.16 Ratify the Optional Protocol to CEDAW to provide greater protection to women (Costa Rica); 105.17 Consider ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Republic of Korea); 105.18 Finalize the procedure of adoption of the Optional Protocol to CEDAW (Turkey); 105.19 Speed up the process of ratification of OP-CAT and establish an effective national preventive mechanism for preventing torture (Czech Republic); 105.20 Ratify the Optional Protocol to CAT (Lebanon);  105.21 Ratify ILO Convention 169 (Paraguay); 105.22 Withdraw the reservation to the Second Protocol to ICCPR and abolish the death penalty for all crimes (Montenegro); 105.23 Remove all reservations to the Second Protocol to ICCPR aimed at abolishing the death penalty (France); 105.24 Maintain the separation of powers so that all branches of government respect the constitutional authority of each other branch (United States of America); 105.25 Maintain the current legislation, which respects the human person at all stages of his or her life (the Holy See);  105.26 Strengthen measures aimed at protecting vulnerable persons and ensure that they have full access to natural resources (Côte d’Ivoire); 105.27 Further strengthen institutional and legislative measures to address inequality and disparities affecting persons belonging to vulnerable groups particularly in rural areas, in terms of access to education, health and employment (Sri Lanka); 105.28 Consider drawing up and implementing a national human rights programme that addresses comprehensively issues such as public safety and violence, taking into account all social actors (Nicaragua); 105.29 Promote the drawing up and adoption of a national human rights plan (Peru); 105.30 Examine the possibility of creating a monitoring system of international recommendations to facilitate the systematization and follow-up of the recommendations from human rights bodies and special procedures (Paraguay); 105.31 Establish mechanisms of evaluation and follow-up of the implementation of human rights public policies and programmes, in particular those referred to the fight against discrimination in all its forms and on any grounds, taking into account the recommendations from the UPR and other human rights mechanisms (Colombia); 105.32 Draft, in consultation with civil society, and adopt a law on gender identity for transgender persons in which their right to identity is recognized among other civil and political rights (Spain); 105.33 Bring its legislation into conformity with its commitment to equality and non-discrimination, by prohibiting discrimination based on sexual orientation (Canada); 105.34 Take concrete measures to strengthen its policies of promotion and protection of LGBT people, through public policies which combat hate crimes against those individuals (Brazil); 105.35 Continue the effective implementation of preventive programmes to guarantee the full enjoyment of rights and the protection of LGBTI people against acts of violence and discrimination affecting them (Chile); 105.36 Guarantee the right of all people to live and develop in accordance with their self-perceived gender identity (Colombia); 105.37 Keep striving to eradicate unchecked criminality, corruption and gang activity, which produce devastating human rights violations, especially those acts of violence and murder, by focusing on education, proper employment and transparency in law enforcement (Holy See);  105.38 Strengthen measures to confront the origins of violence and crime in its combat against organized crime and adopt a restorative justice approach for young people (Norway); 105.39 Undertake extensive action in order to demilitarize the police force and to grant responsibility for public security to the appropriate institutions (Greece); 105.40 End the involvement of military personnel in civilian security work, and train police officers to carry out their responsibility to protect the population efficiently and with integrity (Norway); 105.41 Make increased efforts to protect children from economic exploitation, inter alia through the introduction of legislation establishing the minimum age for admission to employment and ensuring decent working conditions (Czech Republic); 105.42 Reinforce the judicial system and law enforcement authority with a view to eliminating widespread and organized violent crimes which seriously threaten public safety, especially the safe school environment (Republic of Korea); 105.43 Improve the transparency and efficiency of its judicial system; ensuring a fair, open and prompt process for all sectors of society (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 105.44 Improve pretrial processing times and increase resources for penal reform (United States of America); 105.45 Combat impunity by increasing the capacity of investigators and prosecutors and reducing corruption in the public sector and judiciary (United States of America); 105.46 Take increased measures to prevent and combat impunity for human rights violations through investigation of all threats, harassment, intimidation, violence and enforced disappearances, in particular those concerning children and human rights defenders, and ensure that all perpetrators are held accountable for their actions (Ireland); 105.47 Consider amending the General Amnesty Act of 1993 which remains an obstacle to the punishment of serious human rights perpetrators (Republic of Korea); 105.48 Take concrete and substantial steps in matters of transitional justice in order to address grave human rights violations committed during the internal armed conflict 1979–1992 (Sweden); 105.49 Make the necessary constitutional and legislative amendments in order to decriminalize and remove the ban on abortion (Australia); 105.50 Repeal laws criminalizing abortion and eliminate all punitive measures (Iceland); 105.51 Revise its legislation related to abortion regarding victims of rape, especially victims that are minors and when the health of the woman is seriously at risk (Luxembourg); 105.52 Amend its legislation on abortion (Norway); 105.53 Adopt legislation on abortion that is in line with its international human rights obligations, taking into account indicators such as medical risks, rape, incest and ensure improved access to appropriate methods of contraception (Germany); 105.54 Decriminalize abortion when the pregnancy endangers the mother’s life or health, and when it is the result of rape (Spain); 105.55 Initiate an open public debate on sexual and reproductive health and rights and decriminalize life-saving abortion and abortion in cases of pregnancies resulting from rape or incest (Czech Republic); 105.56 Decriminalize abortion and ensure that safe and legal abortion services are available for those women and girls whose pregnancy is a result of rape or whose lives or health are put at risk (Slovenia); 105.57 Consider reviewing its legislation on abortion in order to take into account situations where pregnancy is the result of rape or incest, or when the pregnant woman’s life is in danger (Sweden); 105.58 Ensure the availability of safe abortions, at a minimum, in cases where the life or health of the pregnant woman or girl is at risk, and in cases where the pregnancy is the result of rape (Iceland); 105.59 Immediately and unconditionally release all women and girls who have been imprisoned for undergoing abortions or for having miscarriages (Iceland); 105.60 Free all women and girls incarcerated for having undergone an abortion, or for having endured one spontaneously, and also remove their criminal records for these motives (Spain); 105.61 Ensure that all women, especially the young, have access to contraception and anonymous, non-discriminatory and confidential sexual and reproductive health services (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 105.62 Ensure access to comprehensive sex education and to sexual and reproductive health services, including contraception (Iceland). 106. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English only]   Composition of the delegation The delegation of El Salvador was headed by Mr. Carlos Alfredo Castaneda, Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs and composed of the following members: • Mr. Joaquín Alexander Maza Martelli, Ambassador, Permanent Representative in Geneva;  • Ms. Tania Camila Rosa, Director General for Human Rights, Ministry for Foreign Affairs;  • Mr. Jorge Alberto Jiménez, Director General for Integral Social Development, Ministry for Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Carmen Elena Castillo, Minister Counsellor, Permanent Mission in Geneva;  • Ms. Matilde Hernández de Espinoza, Under-Secretary for Social Inclusion;  • Ms. Zaira Navas, Director of the National Council for Children and Adolescents; • Ms. Gloria Martínez, Director for International Systems of Human Rights Protection, Ministry for Foreign Affairs.     